Simplex Consensus: A Simple and Fast Consensus Protocol
Benjamin Y Chan ∗
Cornell University
byc@cs.cornell.edu
Rafael Pass †
Tel-Aviv University and Cornell Tech
rafaelp@tau.ac.il
June 1, 2023
Abstract
We present a theoretical framework for analyzing the efficiency of consensus protocols, and
apply it to analyze the optimistic and pessimistic confirmation times of state-of-the-art partially-
synchronous protocols in the so-called “rotating leader/random leader” model of consensus
(recently popularized in the blockchain setting).
We next present a new and simple consensus protocol in the partially synchronous setting,
tolerating f < n/3 byzantine faults; in our eyes, this protocol is essentially as simple to de-
scribe as the simplest known protocols, but it also enjoys an even simpler security proof, while
matching and, even improving, the efficiency of the state-of-the-art (according to our theoretical
framework).
As with the state-of-the-art protocols, our protocol assumes a (bare) PKI, a digital signature
scheme, collision-resistant hash functions, and a random leader election oracle, which may be
instantiated with a random oracle (or a CRS).
∗Supported in part by NSF CNS-2128519, NSF Award RI-1703846 and AFOSR Award FA9550-18-1-0267
†Supported in part by NSF Award RI-1703846, AFOSR Award FA9550-18-1-0267, a JP Morgan Faculty Award
and an award from the Algorand Foundation
1
1 Introduction
Distributed consensus algorithms [LSP82] allow large numbers of machines to agree on a single
ground truth, even when some machines malfunction. Born out of research towards fault-tolerant
aircraft control [WLG+78] in the 1970s, consensus algorithms have since then touched every corner
of the Internet, and are used by the Internet’s most important services to replicate data at scale
(e.g. Google’s Chubby lock service [Bur06], Apache Zookeeper [Apa], and many more). Today,
new varieties of consensus algorithms power blockchains such as Bitcoin [Nak08] and Ethereum
[B+14], where users propose transactions which are then batched into agreed-upon blocks, and
where—unlike in classical consensus algorithms—the set of servers is not known ahead of time, and
instead miners can join the system at any time (in other words, the system is “permissionless”).
Subsequently, blockchains have found new applications in cryptocurrency and also in bringing
liquidity to otherwise illiquid markets (such as the market for art [AJK +22]).
At their core, consensus algorithms allow people to work together and collaborate without
needing to trust each other. In some sense, they (and their evolution as multi-party computation
algorithms [Yao82]) are the epitome of enabling collaboration without needing trust. In a society
that heavily depends on trust-mitigation protocols (such as markets, democracy, a justice system,
etc) to keep people safe, boost productivity, and to provide a high standard of living, continued
innovation on trustless algorithms is of fundamental importance.
Relevance of the permissioned setting. In this paper, we return our focus to classical per-
missioned consensus protocols, where the set of participants is known ahead of time. This setting
has by now been studied for four decades [LSP82], but importantly, many modern techniques for
realizing scalable, energy efficient permissionless blockchains (see e.g. Ethereum [BG17], Algorand
[CGMV18]) rely on classical permissioned consensus as a building block. In particular, blockchain
applications bring forth new desiderata for such consensus protocols, and require them to be faster
and more robust than ever before, which we will soon make more precise.
Our focus here is on the partially-synchronous model of computation [DLS88], which is specified
by a worst-case bound on message delivery ∆, but where the actual message delivery time may
be much smaller δ < ∆. The protocol is aware of ∆, but is not aware of δ; additionally, even
the worst-case bound may not always hold, but is only required to hold after GST (the global
stabilization time); liveness is only required to hold after GST, and consistency holds always 1. As
we are in the partially-synchronous model, we assume the byzantine attacker can control at most
1/3 of the players (which is optimal [DLS88]). The partial-synchronous model is well-suited for
settings that require security even if the network is partitioned (e.g. due to a Denial-of-Service
attack), or if message delivery is unreliable (e.g. on today’s Internet). Note that the partially-
synchronous approach underlies many of the most successful consensus protocols deployed today,
including Paxos [LAM98] and PBFT [CL +99].
Additionally, we adopt the multicast model of communication. In the multicast model, players
communicate by multicasting a message to the entire network, as opposed in the point-to-point
model, where players send each message to a single recipient (whose identity must usually be
known). The multicast model is the model of choice for protocols built for the large-scale peer-to-
peer setting (see Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Algorand as examples).
1As usual, the model can also be extended a more general model where liveness hold during “periods of synchrony”;
for simplicity, we ignore this distinction.
2
Consensus with rotating/random leaders. In a blockchain protocol or a state-machine repli-
cation system, clients send the system a series of transactions ( txs) over time and the protocol
participants must collectively decide the order in which the transactions are executed, outputting a
LOG of transactions. Suppose that there are two conflicting pending transactions txs and txs′ (for
instance, comprising a double spend), and that the protocol must decide which of them to include
in the final log of transactions. Typically, protocols (in the partially synchronous setting) decide
which of the transactions to include by either flipping an imperfect global coin [CR93, CKS00] to
directly choose one of the transactions, or by electing a leader process to decide on behalf of all of
the participants. Nearly all modern protocols deployed in practice fall into the second category, in-
cluding blockchains, where the leader is equivalent to the block proposer (see Paxos [Lam01], PBFT
[CL+99], Bitcoin [Nak08], Ethereum [B+14], Algorand [GHM+17]). The reason is one of scalability:
a block proposer can sequence many transactions in a row (as in PBFT), and more importantly also
aggregate transactions together into blocks to improve throughput (as in blockchains). In contrast,
flipping a global coin for each pair of transactions is expensive and is largely restricted to solving
binary consensus, unless the coin is itself used to elect a leader.
Consequently, block proposers (or leaders) have disproportionate power when deciding the order
of transactions within blocks, or across blocks if it is proposing many blocks in a sequence. In a
system such as Ethereum, where block proposers can profit from ordering transactions at will, such
a disproportionate balance of power affects the security and fairness of the underlying protocol
(e.g. via “miner extractable value” [DGK +20]). Mitigating the power of block proposers to reorder
transactions within a block is an active area of research (e.g. see [HCPS19, KZGJ20]). Over
multiple blocks, it is prudent to ensure that each new block is proposed by a different, “fresh”
block proposer2, if only to ensure that no process is ‘in power’ for too long.
A slow leader can additionally cause blocks to be confirmed slowly and drastically reduce
throughput. In a ‘stable leader’ protocol such as PBFT, where the leader is never changed un-
less it detectably misbehaves, this can be problematic. Even if there is only a single slow process, if
that process is the leader, then every block proposal may take much longer than the true network
speed δ. Thus one more reason to rotate leaders frequently is to ensure that a single slow leader
cannot slow down the entire operation for too long (e.g. see [AAC +05]).
In this paper, we focus on leader-based consensus protocols in the permissioned setting, specif-
ically those protocols that rotate its leaders, or randomly choose their leaders for each block. This
seems essential for both fairness and performance in the common case where proposers can be
corrupt.
Efficiency measures for consensus with rotating leaders. There has been a recent explosion
in new leader-based consensus protocols. To compare these various approaches, and to understand
whether they are “optimal” in some well-defined way, we need to specify some efficiency measures.
In this paper, we consider the following notions of efficiency:
• Optimistic confirmation time: Suppose that all block proposers are honest. When a transac-
tion is provided to the protocol (after GST), how long does it take for the transaction to be
finalized? The optimistic confirmation time is (informally) the sum of the “proposal confir-
mation time” and the “optimistic block time” (both rather imprecise, but popular, notions):
2See the related notion of chain quality [GKL15], which (informally) requires that any sufficiently long chain
contain a large fraction of blocks that are mined by honest parties.
3
– Proposal confirmation time: Suppose an honest proposer is elected and proposes a block;
how long does it take for that block to be finalized?
– Optimistic block time: Suppose all block proposers are honest. How long does a pending
transaction need to wait to be included in the next honest block proposal?
If the optimistic confirmation time depends only on the true message delivery time δ and not
on the known upper bound ∆, we say that the protocol is optimistically responsive [PS18].
In practice, ∆ is usually set conservatively s.t. δ is much smaller than ∆, in which case a
protocol that runs at the speed of δ (instead of the parameter ∆) is much preferable.
• Pessimistic confirmation time: Suppose that some numberf of eligible proposers are corrupt.
When a transaction is provided to the protocol (after GST), how long does it take for the
transaction to be finalized? This is an important metric in practice, where there are almost
certainly leaders who are offline, or even downright malicious. Uncooperative leaders may
choose to exclude a transaction from its block proposals, whereas slow leaders may not propose
it at all. There are two notions here:
– Worst-case confirmation time. In the very worst-case, how long must we wait for a
transaction to be finalized? The bound must hold for any transaction arrival time t.
– (Expected) pessimistic confirmation time. In expectation, how long does it take for a
transaction to be finalized?
Essentially all protocols in the literature consider a “view-based liveness” notion that is
tailored for rotating leader based protocols. 3 Following the literature, we will also con-
sider this notion of expected “view-based” liveness: Suppose that the protocol proceeds
in incrementing “views” or “iterations” v := 1, 2,... where each viewv is assigned a sin-
gle leader Lv. Fix some view number v ahead of time, and suppose that a transaction is
provided to every honest player at the time they enter viewv. How long (in expectation)
does it take for the transaction to be finalized, once every honest process has entered
view v?
We focus mainly on the expected pessimistic confirmation time. For our protocol, as well as
many other protocols in the literature, we can turn an expected liveness bound into a worst-
case liveness bound by losing an additive term of ω(logλ)· Θ(∆). Note that, if a protocol
requires multiple honest leaders in a row to confirm transactions, the worst-case bound will
be worse.
The State of the Art. Before describing our contributions, we summarize the current start of
the art; we focus only on leader-based protocols that rotate their leaders or elect random leaders.
(The interested reader will find further comparisons of related works in Section 4, building on the
survey below.) Throughout, denote n the number of participants, and f the number of faults; we
consider static corruptions only.
3We may also consider an expected worst-case confirmation time , where, for any transaction arrival time t after
GST, both fixed ahead of time, a transaction must be finalized soon after t in expectation over the coins of the
execution. Such a bound may be useful to capture real-world liveness, but is typically difficult to analyze in a setting
where the adversary can control the scheduling of messages.
4
Roughly speaking, the literature has focused on optimizing the optimistic confirmation times ,
but this has come at the expense of sacrificing the pessimistic confirmation time. In more details,
let’s first examine optimistic confirmation time:
• Proposal confirmation-time favoring. The seminal paper of PBFT [CL+99] achieves a proposal
confirmation time of 3δ for honest block proposals, but has stable leaders. Instead, consider
an optimistically responsive “base version” of the Algorand agreement protocol [CGMV18],
denote Algorand* 4, which is similar to PBFT but allows a different leader for each block.
Algorand* achieves a proposal confirmation time of 3 δ, and an optimistic block time of 3 δ.
[ANRX21] later showed that a 3δ proposal confirmation time is optimal when f≥ (n+2)/5.5
• Block-time favoring. Following Hotstuff [YMR +19], a new class of pipe-lined protocols
were subsequently designed to improve the optimistic block time of rotating-leader proto-
cols from 3δ to 2δ. These protocols pipe-line proposals, similar to Nakamoto style consensus
[Nak08], and achieve an optimistic block time of 2 δ. However, these protocols require a
worse proposal confirmation time: proposals take 4δ time (Pala [CPS18]), or 5δ time (Jolteon
[GKKS+22]/Pipelined Fast-Hotstuff [JNFG20]) or 7 δ time (Hotstuff [YMR +19]) to be con-
firmed, and additionally require 2, 3, and 4 honest leaders in a row respectively to confirm
each block. In essence, these protocols improve the blocktime to just 2 δ, but they sacrifice
the proposal confirmation time. Moreover, the pessimistic confirmation time blows up sig-
nificantly. Note that Hotstuff and its variants are generally designed for the point-to-point
messaging model, where, to reduce communication, players often send their votes to a single
recipient who aggregates them; if players instead multicast their votes, the confirmation time
improves slightly (but only shaves off δ, or one less honest leader in a row).
• Simultaneously proposal confirmation-time and block-time friendly: The recent ICC protocol
[CDH+22] simultaneously achieves the state-of-the-art 3δ proposal confirmation time and 2δ
optimistic block time. However, this protocol again requires (essentially) 2 honest leaders in
a row to confirm a block if a faulty leader was previously elected. Requiring multiple honest
leaders in a row to finalize a block severely impacts the pessimistic confirmation time, which
we will explore next.
Pessimistic liveness. Few protocols explicitly analyze their expected or worst-case confirmation time
under pessimistic conditions, despite it being an important performance desiderata in practice—
after all, it is natural to assume that a fraction of the participants will be offline if not outright
malicious. To explicitly compare the different approaches, we focus on the setting where each
“iteration” of the protocol is associated with a randomly selected leader (essentially all the protocols
in the literature, for this setting, assume or instantiate such a sequence of leaders). Throughout,
assume that f =⌊n/3⌋.
The current state-of-the-art is achieved by Algorand* (as defined above), which achieves 4δ+2∆
expected view-based liveness. Protocols that require multiple honest leaders in a row to confirm
4While the version of Algorand agreement in [CGMV18] is not optimistically responsive, it can be easily made so
if every period has a unique leader known ahead of time (provided by a leader election oracle in lieu of using a VRF).
Then, players can simply ‘soft-vote’ immediately on seeing a proposal from the leader, and ‘cert-vote’ immediately
on seeing 2n/3 soft-votes, much like in PBFT.
5We do not consider optimizations of the variety made in Parametrized FaB Paxos [MA06] and SBFT [GAG +19],
where if f < (n + 2)/5, a proposal confirmation time of 2 δ is possible without affecting worst-case fault tolerance.
We are particularly interested in the case when leaders are honest, but 1 /3 of voters are not.
5
Proposal
Conf. Time
Optimistic
Block Time
Pessimistic
Liveness (f =⌈n/3⌉− 1)
Simplex 3 δ 2δ 3.5δ + 1.5∆
Algorand*
[CGMV18] 3δ 3δ 4δ + 2∆
ICC
[CDH+22] 3δ 2δ 5.5δ + 1.5∆
PaLa
[CPS18] 4δ 2δ 6.25δ + 9.25∆
Pipeline Fast-Hotstuff
[JNFG20]
Jolteon
[GKKS+22]
5δ 2δ 10.87δ + 9.5∆
Chained Hotstuff (v6)
[YMR+19] 7δ 2δ 19.31δ + 12.18∆
P-Sync Bullshark
[SGSKK22b] 6δ 3δ 6δ + 9∆
Streamlet
[CS20a] 6∆ 2∆ 35 .56∆
*Base protocol without sortition.
Table 1: Latency of Popular Consensus Protocols (Random Leaders)
transactions generally achieve degraded expected liveness: ICC [CDH+22], PaLa [CPS18], Pipelined
Fast-Hotstuff/Jolteon [JNFG20, GKKS+22], and Chained Hotstuff (v6) [YMR +19] have expected
liveness of 5.5δ + 1.5∆, 6.25δ + 9.25∆, 10.87δ + 9.5∆, and 19.31δ + 12.18∆ respectively.6 Generally
speaking, the more honest leaders required in a row to finalize a block, the worse the expected
pessimistic liveness.
These protocols also get an even worse worst-case confirmation time: a protocol that requires k
honest leaders in a row would need a longer sequence of random leaders to guarantee that k honest
leaders in a row are elected, compared to if it only required 1 honest leader for confirmation. 7
Protocols with random leaders generally require just a sequence of at least ω(logλ) leaders to
guarantee one honest leader.
So, summarizing the state of the art, there is a trade-off between achieving good optimistic
liveness bounds, and and achieving pessimistic liveness bounds.
6Here, Chained Hotstuff is analyzed using a timeout-based pacemaker from LibraBFT [BCC +19] and a timeout of
3∆, since they don’t instantiate their own pacemaker. PaLa is analyzed with a less conservative timeout of 1min=5∆,
and 1sec=2∆ than the ones presented in their paper.
7An alternative is to have a single leader be in power for k iterations in a row, before switching to the next leader;
this sacrifices fairness, since we would like to rotate leaders more frequently, and the latency is still not ideal, since a
faulty leader can delay the execution for k iterations.
6
Our contributions. In this paper, we present a simple consensus protocol, named Simplex, that
matches the best optimistic liveness bounds, while at the same time matching and even improving
the best known pessimistic liveness bounds (both in expectation and in the worst-case). Most
importantly, our protocol is simple to describe and has an, in our eyes, a very simple proof of
correctness—including an easy liveness proof. In contrast, most protocols in the literature have
somewhat informal or difficult liveness arguments or do not analyze their own theoretical latency
at all. (In terms of simplicity, while the protocol itself is arguably more complicated to describe
than Streamlet [CS20a], the proof of correctness is significantly easier, which may make it more
understandable.)
In more details, assuming a “bare” PKI, collision-resistant hash functions, and a random leader
election oracle (which can be instantiated using a Random Oracle), Simplex implements partially-
synchronous consensus (tolerating the standard f <n/3 static byzantine faults), while achieving
– an optimal proposal confirmation time of 3 δ,
– an optimistic block time of 2 δ,
– an expected pessimistic confirmation time of 3 .5δ + 1.5∆,
– a worst-case pessimistic confirmation time of 4 δ +ω(logλ)· (3∆ +δ),
– and using O(n) multicast complexity.
As observed by [PS17], the Random Oracle can be replaced with a PRF (which follows from
collision-resistant hash functions [HILL99]) and a CRS chosen after the public keys.
We also note that using now standard techniques, we can bring down the communication com-
plexity to polylog(λ) (in the multi-cast model) and linear (in the point-to-point model) through
subsampling the committee of voters [CM19, CPS18]. This gives a scalable protocol that may be
suitable for deployment in practice on large-scale peer-to-peer networks. We do not innovate on
this subsampling and therefore just focus on the “base protocol” (which determines the concrete
efficiency also of the protocol with subsampling).
Comparison of techniques. Our contributions build on the techniques of many prior works.
In contrast with the pipelined protocols of [CS20a, YMR +19, CPS18, JNFG20, GKKS +22], which
generally fall into a streamlined “propose/vote” paradigm where processes only send one vote type,
our protocol follows [CL +99] and requires processes to multicast a second “finalize” message to
finalize blocks (in parallel with the next block proposal). We posit that the resulting protocol is
actually simpler despite the second voting step. 8 Moreover, having a second voting step makes for
a faster protocol in the optimistic case, matching the proposal confirmation time of PBFT. Another
technique that we use is that of a “dummy block”: if, during some iteration, a process detects no
progress (i.e. due to a faulty leader or network), it will timeout and vote for the dummy block. On
seeing 2n/3 votes for the dummy block, a player may move to the next iteration and try again with
a new leader. It is similar to the notion of a timeout certificate in [CPS18, GKKS +22, YMR+19];
the difference is that, in our protocol, a process must either vote for the dummy block of height
h, or vote “finalize” for a block of height h (whereas no such stipulation was made in prior work).
Then, if we see 2 n/3 finalize messages, we can be sure that no process saw 2 n/3 votes for the
dummy block at that height, and it is safe to finalize the block. The result is a simpler consistency
and liveness proof; moreover, a block proposer never needs to wait extra time before proposing
(unlike in [CPS18, BKM18]) even after seeing a timeout block.
8To recover a streamlined protocol, it is possible to “piggyback” the finalize message onto the first vote message
of the next block; this would only make liveness a little slower, and consistency would still hold.
7
Comparison with asynchronous protocols. Consensus protocols have also been designed for
the asynchronous setting [Rab83, CR93, CKS00, MXC +16, AMS19, etc], where protocols should
make progress even before GST, as long as messages are eventually delivered. Asynchronous pro-
tocols generally have worse latency than their partial-synchronous counterparts after GST. Here,
we only mention the elegant DAGRider protocol [KKKNS21], which requires 4 rounds of reliable
broadcast (≈ 12δ time) in the optimistic case, and Bullshark [SGSKK22a], which adds a syn-
chronous fast-path but still requires 2 rounds of reliable broadcast (or 6 δ time) optimistically, as
opposed to the optimal 3 δ. Moreover, essentially every asynchronous protocol requires a common
coin, which is most practically implemented using threshold signatures, following [CKS00]. Thresh-
old signatures require a private setup or trusted dealer, which aside from being hard to implement,
makes it difficult to subsample the protocol for scalability.
2 The Protocol
We describe the Simplex consensus protocol in the framework of blockchains, which provides an
elegant framework for reasoning about consensus on a sequence of values.
To start, the protocol assumes a (bare) public-key infrastructure (PKI), and a digital signature
scheme. Additionally, letH :{0, 1}∗→{ 0, 1}∗ be a publicly known collision-resistant hash function.
• Bare PKI setup. Before the protocol execution, a trusted party generates a ( pki, ski)
keypair for each process i∈ [n] using the key generation algorithm for the digital signature
scheme, and for each i∈ [n] sends ( pki, ski) to process i. Each process replies with a pk′
i,
where honest processes reply with the same pk′
i = pki. The trusted party then sends{pk′
i}i∈[n]
to all parties. 9
• Notation for digital signatures. For any message m∈{ 0, 1}∗ and a process p∈ [n], we
denote by⟨m⟩p a tuple of the form ( m,σ ), where σ is a valid signature for m under process
p’s public key.
The protocol uses the following data structures.
• Blocks, block heights, and the genesis block. A block b is a tuple (h, parent, txs), where
h∈ N is referred to as the height of the block, parent is a string that (typically) is meant to be
the hash of a “parent” blockchain, and txs is an arbitrary sequence of strings, corresponding
to transactions contained in the block.
Define the genesis block to be the special tuple b0 := (0,∅,∅).
• Dummy blocks. The special dummy block of height h is the tuple ⊥h := (h,⊥,⊥). This
is an empty block that will be inserted into the blockchain at heights where no agreement is
reached. A dummy block does not point to a specific parent.
• Blockchains. A blockchain of height h is a sequence of blocks (b0,b 1,...,b h) such that b0 is
the genesis block, and for each i∈ [h], either bi =⊥i or bi = (i,H (b0,...,b i−1), txs) for some
txs.
9Note that this is referred to as a Bare PKI [BCNP04] since malicious parties may pick their own, potentially
malformed, public keys.
8
• Notarized blocks and blockchains. A notarization for a block b —which may be the
dummy block— is a set of signed messages of the form ⟨vote,h,b⟩p from≥ 2n/3 unique
processesp∈ [n], whereh is the height of the blockb. A notarized block is a block augmented
with a notarization for that block.
A notarized blockchain is a tuple (b0,...,b h,S ), where b0,...,b h is a blockchain, and S is a
set of notarizations, one for each block b1,...,b h. We stress that a notarized blockchain may
contain notarized dummy blocks.
• Finalized blocks and blockchains. A finalization for a heighth is a set of signed messages
of the form⟨finalize,h⟩p from≥ 2n/3 unique processes p∈ [n]. We say that a block of height
h is finalized if it is notarized and accompanied by a finalization for h.
A finalized blockchain is either just the genesis blockb0, or a notarized blockchain accompanied
by a finalization for the last block.
• Linearizing a blockchain. Given a blockchain b0,b 1,...,b h, denote linearize(b0,b 1,...,b h)
to be the (most natural) operation that takes the sequences of transactions from each individ-
ual block, in order, and outputs the concatenation, to form a total ordering of all transactions
in the blockchain.
2.1 The Protocol Description and Main Theorem
We are now ready to describe the protocol. The protocol runs in sequential iterationsh = 1, 2, 3,...
where each process starts in iterationh = 1. Note that each process may advance through iterations
at a different speed, and at any given time, two processes may be in two different iterations, due
to network delay (since we are in the partially synchronous setting). As local state, each process
p∈ [n] keeps track of which iteration h it is currently in, and also stores all of the notarized blocks
and messages that it has seen thus far.
Additionally, we assume that each iteration h has a pre-determined block proposer or leader
Lh∈ [n] that is randomly chosen ahead of time; this is referred to as a random leader election oracle
and can be implemented using a random oracle: namely, Lh :=H∗(h) mod n, whereH∗(·) is some
public hash function modeled as a random oracle.
Playerp on entering iteration h does the following:
1. Leader proposal: If p = Lh, p multicasts a single proposal of the form
⟨propose,h,b 0,...,b h−1,bh,S⟩p.
Here,b0,...,b h isp’s choice of a blockchain of height h, where (b0,...,b h−1,S ) is a notarized
parent blockchain, and bh̸=⊥h. The new block bh should contain every pending transaction
that p has seen that is not already in the parent chain.
2. Dummy blocks: Each process p starts a new timer Th, set to fire locally after 3∆ time. 10
If Th fires, vote for the dummy block by multicasting ⟨vote,h,⊥h⟩p.
10In addition, we could optimistically fire the timer when the leader “equivocates”; we omit the rule for brevity.
9
3. Notarizing block proposals: On seeing the first proposal of the form
⟨propose,h,b 0,...,b h,S⟩Lh
check that bh ̸= ⊥h, that b0,...,b h is a valid blockchain, and that ( b0,...,b h−1,S ) is a
notarized blockchain. If all checks pass, multicast ⟨vote,h,b h⟩p.
4. Next iteration and finalize votes: On seeing a notarized blockchain of height h, enter
iterationh+1. At the same time, p multicasts its view of the notarized blockchain to everyone
else.
At this point in time, if the timerTh did not fire yet: cancelTh (so it never fires) and multicast
⟨finalize,h⟩p.
5. Finalized Outputs: Wheneverp sees a finalized blockchain b0,...,b h′, output the contents
LOG← linearize(b0,...,b h′).
Let us informally describe the intuition behind the protocol. In each iteration, the processes
collectively try to get the leader’s block (proposal) notarized; if this fails due to a faulty leader or
a faulty network, then the timer will fire. The timer thus upper bounds the amount of time each
leader has to get its block notarized; when it fires, processes now have the option of voting for the
dummy block and (on seeing a notarization for this dummy block) moving to next height to try
again with the next leader. Eventually, we will hit a good leader and have good network conditions
and an iteration h will complete without the timer Th firing for any honest process. Consistency,
on the other hand, will follow from a straight-forward use of the standard “quorum intersection
lemma”.
Summarizing, we get the following theorem.
Theorem 2.1 (Partially-synchronous Consensus) . Assuming collision-resistant hash functions,
digital signatures, a PRF, a bare PKI, and a CRS, there is a partially-synchronous blockchain
protocol forf <n/3 static corruptions that has O(n) multicast complexity, optimistic confirmation
time of 5δ, worst-case confirmation time of 4δ +ω(logλ)·(3∆+δ), and expected view-based liveness
of 3.5δ + 1.5∆.
Note that the existence of digital signatures and PRFs follows from the existence of collison-
resistant hash functions (see [Rom90] and [HILL99] respectively), but we include it here to em-
phasize what cryptographic building blocks we rely on. Also, as noted in [PS17], we can replace
the random oracle with a common reference string (CRS) that is chosen after the adversary has
registered its public keys, and instead use Lh = PRFcrs(h) mod n (and note that existence of PRFs
follow from the existence of collision-resistant hash functions [HILL99]).
2.2 Proof outline
Let us provide a proof outline which conveys the essence of the whole proof:
Consistency. The consistency proof is straightforward. Let Alice and Bob be two honest play-
ers. We want to show that if Alice finalizes a chain b0,...,b h, and Bob finalizes a longer chain
b0,...,b ′
h,...,b ′
h′, then Alice’s chain is a prefix of Bob’s, namely that b0...,b h = b0,...,b ′
h. It
10
suffices to show that Bob’s block at height h is identical to Alice’s, namely that b′
h = bh; by the
collision resistant hash function, the parent chains must be the same.
First, since Alice saw a finalization for height h, then the dummy block⊥h cannot be notarized
in Bob’s view, by the standard “quorum intersection” lemma. This is because an honest player
only votes for either⟨finalize,h⟩, or⟨vote,h,⊥h⟩, and never both. Likewise, since Alice saw that bh
is notarized, then a competing non-dummy block b′
h̸=bh also cannot be notarized in Bob’s view,
again by the standard “quorum intersection” lemma. This follows because an honest player only
votes for a single (non-dummy) block proposal per iteration. Immediately it must be that b′
h =bh,
as required.
Liveness. Perhaps more interestingly, the liveness proof is also simple—this is in contrast to all
previous protocols in the partially-synchronous setting that we are aware of, each of which require
a subtle/complex analysis. We first claim that any honest leader can drive the protocol forward
after GST. To see this, let us first observe that honest players need to be “synchronized” after GST:
“Synchronization after GST” (Sync): If an honest player enters an iteration h by time
t> GST, then every honest player enters iteration h by time t +δ.
This follows because when an honest player enters iteration h, it forwards a notarized blockchain
of height h− 1 to everyone else (and thus they will enter iteration h once they receive it, unless
they had already entered iteration h before).
Now, assume the honest leader for height h proposes a block at time t > GST. We shall
argue that the block it proposes will be finalized by time t + 3δ. This follows from the following
observations.
1. Every honest player must enter iteration h + 1 by time t + 2δ. This is because either (a)
every honest player votes for the leader’s block by time t +δ (thus they all see a notarized
blockchain for h by time t + 2δ), or (b) some honest player i did not vote for the leader’s
block. In the latter case, player i must have already been in iteration h + 1 (or higher) when
it saw the block proposal by time t +δ (since otherwise it would have voted as by Sync, it
must be in iteration at least h by time t +δ) and thus would have forwarded a notarized
blockchain of height h by t +δ. So again, every honest player will enter iteration h + 1 by
time t + 2δ.
2. No timer of an honest player can fire until after time t + 2δ. This is because no honest player
could have entered iteration h before time t−δ by Sync. Consequently, the earliest any
(honest) timer can fire is after time t−δ + 3∆>t + 2δ.
Combining Observation 1 and 2, we have that every honest player must vote ⟨finalize,h⟩ when it
enters iteration h + 1 (because none of their timers have fired by the time they enter iteration
h + 1). Consequently, by time t + 3δ, every honest player sees that h is finalized. Since no honest
player voted for the dummy block (since by Observation 2, their timers did not fire), it must be
the leader’s block that is finalized, which concludes the proof for the case that the leader is honest.
Let us next consider the case that the leader for iteration h is malicious. We shall argue that
in this case, the iteration will be “skipped” (and all honest processes move on to iteration h + 1)
after at most 3∆ + δ time: Suppose that every honest player is in iteration h by time t >GST.
Either every honest player fires its timer (by time t + 3∆), or some honest player does not fire its
11
timer. In the first case, they all vote for the dummy block and see a notarized dummy block by
time t + 3∆ +δ, thus entering iteration h + 1. In the second case, that player must have entered
iterationh + 1 before its timer could fire, i.e. before t + 3∆; but as before, then every honest player
will follow it into iteration h + 1 by time t + 3∆ +δ.
3 Formal Analysis
3.1 Preliminaries
We analyze the Simplex protocol in the framework of blockchains. Throughout, when we say that
a message is “in honest view”, we mean that it is in the view of some honest process (but perhaps
not all honest processes).
The Permissioned Setting. We consider static byzantine corruptions. Denote n the number
of players, f <n/3 of which are set to be “corrupted”. The corrupted players are chosen ahead of
time, before the setup phase. The remaining players are “honest”.
Protocol Execution. In our setting the adversary has power over the network and can choose
when to deliver messages sent by honest players. However, in good network conditions, message
delivery should occur “quickly”. This requires that we formalize a notion of time, in addition to
specifying the execution of a distributed protocol. 11 In the spirit of the UC framework [Can01],
considern player machines, an adversary machineA, and an environmentZ, where each is modeled
as an instance of a non-uniform probabilistic polynomial time (nuPPT) interactive Turing Machine
(ITM) that takes as input the security parameter 1 λ. The adversary A controls the f (statically
corrupted) faulty players. Each player additionally has access to an authenticated multicast channel
Fmult over whichA has scheduling power. We use the notationEXECΠ(1λ,Z,A) to denote a random
execution of the protocol Π with A andZ, over the coins of the setup, the players, A, andZ.
To model time, we consider environments Z that send special “tick” messages to the n player
machines. Fix any execution of a protocol with Z andA on some 1λ. Recall that an execution
is a sequence of activations of instances of machines. Given an execution, we say that it proceeds
in timesteps t = 0, 1, 2,... where timestep t starts at the first point (in the execution) where
the environment Z has sent any player machine exactly t “tick” messages. An event happens
before/at/after time t if it occurs before/during/after timestep t in the execution. The execution
ends whenZ halts.
Network Model and Clocks. We consider adversaries that are partially synchronous [DLS88].
An environment/attacker tuple (Z,A) is“δ-bounded partially synchronous” if, for every protocol
Π, for every security parameter λ, there exists a time GST∈ N s.t. in every execution of Π with Z
andA on 1λ:
• Synchronized clocks. Denote t∗ the time at which Z halts. It must be that Z sends every
honest player exactly one “tick” message at each time t∈ [t∗].
11Doing this composably has been visited in-depth in works such as [KLP05, KMTZ13, BMM14, KZZ16, CHMV17,
BDD+21]. However, here we ignore the question of composability and use an simple stand-alone model for conve-
nience.
12
• Message delivery guarantee after GST. For every time t∈ N, if some honest player sends a
message by time t, the message is delivered by time max( GST,t +δ). Note that GST is not
publicly known.
Definition of a blockchain protocol. Let T : N× N → N, and t ∈ N. A protocol Π,
parametrized by ∆, is said to compute a blockchain with (expected) T (δ, ∆)-liveness if for ev-
ery environmentZ and attackerA, in executions of Π in Z withA on 1λ, the following properties
hold with all but negligible probability in λ:
• Consistency. If two honest players ever output sequences of transactions LOG and LOG′
respectively, either LOG⪯ LOG′ or LOG′⪯ LOG, where “⪯” means “is a prefix of or is equal
to”.
• T (δ, ∆)-Liveness. Fix any timet∈ N. Suppose that (A,Z) is additionallyδ-bounded partially
synchronous for some δ < ∆ and GST < t. Suppose that Z never halts early and that it
always delivers some input txs to every honest player by time t. Then txs is in the output of
every honest player by time t +T (δ, ∆).
We say that a protocol has T (δ, ∆) optimistic confirmation time if it is T (δ, ∆)-live when f = 0.
Similarly, a protocol has T (δ, ∆) worst-case confirmation time if it is T (δ, ∆)-live for any f <
n/3. Now, suppose that a protocol proceeds in incrementing views (or iterations) v = 1, 2,... ,
implemented by a local counter on each process. We say that a protocol has expectedT (δ, ∆)
view-based liveness (w.r.t. the counter v) if:
• ExpectedT (δ, ∆) View-Based Liveness. Fix any viewv∈ N. Suppose that (A,Z) is addition-
ally δ-bounded partially synchronous for some δ <∆ and some GST. Suppose that Z never
halts early and that it always delivers some input txs to every honest player before they enter
view v. Suppose that every honest player enters view v by time t. If t> GST, then txs is in
the output of every honest player by time t +T (δ, ∆), in expectation (over the coins of the
execution).
Optimistic Responsiveness. (Variant of definition from [PS18].) We say that a blockchain
protocol is optimistically responsive if it is has T (δ)-time liveness for some function T (·) that is not
a function of ∆, conditioned on all processes being honest. In other words, when all processes are
honest, the liveness depends only on δ, not ∆.
3.2 Consistency of Simplex
In this section, we present a consistency proof for the protocol. We start with a simple fact about
digital signatures:
Lemma 3.1. With overwhelming probability in λ, for any honest process i, no honest process will
see a valid signature of the form ⟨m⟩i in honest view unless process i previously signed m.
Proof. This is by a direct reduction to the unforgeability of the signature scheme.
We next state the standard quorum-intersection lemma, and for completeness provide its proof.
(This is a very standard technique.)
13
Lemma 3.2. Leth∈ N. Let bh and b′
h be two distinct blocks s.t. neither are equal to the dummy
block⊥h. It cannot be that both bh and b′
h are both notarized in honest view (except with negligible
probability in λ).
Proof. Consider a random execution and letbh andb′
h be any two blocks of heighth in the execution
transcript, s.t. bh̸= b′
h and moreover bh̸=⊥h and b′
h̸=⊥h. We call a tuple ( i,m ) “good” if
m∈{ (vote,h,b h), (vote,h,b′
h)} and there exists a valid signature ⟨m⟩i in the view of some honest
player. By the construction of the protocol, each honest process signs at most one of ( vote,h,b h)
and ( vote,h,b′
h). On the other hand, each corrupted player can sign both messages. Applying
Lemma 3.1, then there are at most (n−f)+f·2 =n+f <4n/3 good tuples with all but negligible
probability in the security parameter. Now assume for the sake of contradiction that there are both
notarizations for bh and b′
h in honest view. Then there are ≥ 2n/3 signatures for ⟨vote,h,b h⟩ and
likewise≥ 2n/3 signatures for ⟨vote,h,b′
h⟩ in honest view; thus there are ≥ 4n/3 good tuples in
honest view, which is a contradiction.
We can also apply the exact same quorum-intersection technique to finalize and⊥ messages; for
completeness, we write out the proof (again).
Lemma 3.3. If there is a finalization for height h in honest view,⊥h cannot be notarized in honest
view (except with negligible probability in λ).
Proof. We call a tuple ( i,m ) “good” if m∈{ (finalize,h ), (vote,h,⊥h)} and there exists a valid
signature⟨m⟩i in the view of some honest player. By the construction of the protocol, each honest
process signs at most one of ⟨finalize,h⟩ or⟨vote,h,⊥h⟩, whereas each corrupted player can sign
either message. Applying Lemma 3.1, there are thus at most ( n−f) +f· 2 =n +f <4n/3 good
tuples (with all but negligible probability in λ). But now assume for the sake of contradiction
that bh is finalized and ⊥h is also notarized. Since bh is finalized, there are ≥ 2n/3 signatures
for⟨finalize,h⟩ in honest view, and likewise since ⊥h is notarized, there are ≥ 2n/3 signatures for
⟨vote,h,⊥h⟩ in honest view; thus there are ≥ 4n/3 good tuples, which is a contradiction.
The main theorem immediately follows:
Theorem 3.1 (Consistency). Suppose that two sequences of transactions, denote LOG and LOG′,
are both output output in honest view. Then either LOG⪯ LOG′ or LOG′⪯ LOG (with overwhelming
probability in λ).
Proof. Immediately, there must be two blockchains denoted b0,b 1,...,b h and b0,b′
1,...,b ′
h′, such
that both are finalized in honest view, whereLOG← linearize(b0,b 1,...,b h) and LOG′← linearize(b0,b′
1,...,b ′
h′).
Without loss of generality, we assume that h≤h′.
It suffices to show that bh = b′
h and moreover that bh ̸= ⊥h. In plainer English, the two
chains should contain the same block at height h, and moreover this block is not the dummy block.
Then by collision-resistant property of the hash function H(·), the parent chains are the same
b0,b 1,...,b h−1 =b0,b′
1,...,b ′
h−1, and thus LOG⪯ LOG′.
To prove thatbh =b′
h, first observe that both b′
h′ and bh are finalized in honest view, and thus
both b′
h′ and bh are notarized in honest view. Because b′
h′ is notarized in honest view, then some
honest process must have voted for it in iterationh′ which implies thatb′
h is also notarized in honest
view. By Lemma 3.3, observing that bh is finalized in honest view, it must be that bh̸=⊥h, and
likewise b′
h̸=⊥h (except with negligible probability in λ). Finally, we apply Lemma 3.2, which
says that since bh and b′
h are both notarized and not the dummy block, it must be that bh = b′
h
(except with negligible probability), concluding the proof.
14
time t + 3Δ - 𝜹
time t
Leader enters 
iteration h and 
proposes a new block 
bh extending a 
notarized chain
b1 … bh-1. 
time t + 𝜹
Every honest player 
enters iteration h
and sees the 
proposal.
time t + 2𝜹
Earliest any honest timer can fire. (Δ > 𝜹) 
Earliest any honest 
player can enter 
iteration h.
time t - 𝜹
Either everyone sends 
“vote bh”, or
someone already 
entered iteration h+1.
Every honest player 
sees some notarized 
blockchain of 
height h.
time t + 3𝜹
Every honest player
sees 2n/3 finalize 
messages for h.
They all send 
“finalize h”.
Figure 1: Timeline of events when the leader of iteration h is honest (t> GST).
3.3 Liveness of Simplex
In this section, we analyze the liveness of the protocol. Throughout, suppose that ( A,Z) is addi-
tionallyδ-bounded partially synchronous, for someδ <∆. Recall that the protocol is parametrized
by ∆ and not δ. When we say that “an honest process has entered iteration h by timet”, we mean
that the process previously entered iteration h at some time t′≤t; when time t comes around, the
process may well be in a larger iteration h′>h .
Lemma 3.4 (Synchronized Iterations). If some honest process has entered iteration h by time t,
then every honest process has entered iteration h by time max(GST,t +δ).
Proof. By the assumption that some honest process p has entered iteration h by time t, we know
that process p must have seen a notarized blockchain of height h− 1 at or before time t. By the
protocol design,p will multicast their view of this notarized blockchain immediately before entering
iterationh. Subsequently, every honest process will have seen a notarized blockchain of heighth−1,
and thus also a notarized blockchain for every heighth′≤h−1, by time max(GST,t +δ). Thus, by
time max(GST,t +δ), every honest process that is not yet in an iteration≥h will have incremented
its iteration number until it is in iteration h.
We show that the proposal confirmation time is 3 δ, and that the optimistic block time is 2 δ.
Lemma 3.5 (The Effect of Honest Leaders) . Let h be any iteration with an honest leader Lh.
Suppose that Lh entered iterationh by some time t> GST. Then, with all but negligible probability,
every honest process will have entered iteration h+1 by time t+2δ. Moreover, every honest process
will see a finalized block at height h, proposed by Lh, by time t + 3δ.
We break the proof down into two subclaims.
Subclaim 3.1. Every honest player will see a notarized blockchain of height h, and thus enter
iterationh + 1, by time t + 2δ (except with negligible probability).
15
Proof. Recall that Lh enters iteration h by time t. Thus, Lh must multicast a proposal for a new
non-dummy blockbh by timet. Thus, by time t+δ (observing thatt> GST), every honest process
must have seen a valid proposal from the leader for bh. There are now two cases:
• Case 1. Every honest process p casts a vote⟨vote,h,b h⟩p by time t +δ. Subsequently every
honest process will see a notarization for bh and thus a notarized blockchain of height h by
time t + 2δ, if not earlier, and enter iteration h + 1, as required.
• Case 2. There is some honest process p that did not multicast a vote ⟨vote,h,b h⟩p by time
t +δ. However, by Lemma 3.4, every honest process should have entered iteration h by time
t+δ, so the only way this could happen is if p entered iterationh+ 1 before timet+δ. Then,
every honest process will have entered iterationh+1 (and thus seen a notarized blockchain of
heighth) by time t + 2δ, again by Lemma 3.4. (This case may have occured if, for instance,
p saw a notarization for Lh’s proposed block without seeing the proposal itself.)
Subclaim 3.2. Every honest player p will multicast ⟨finalize,h⟩p by time t + 2δ, and thus see a
finalized block of height h by time t + 3δ (except with negligible probability).
Proof. By Subclaim 3.1, every honest player sees a notarized blockchain of height h (thus finishing
iteration h) by time t + 2δ. We will show below that no honest player’s timer for iteration h can
fire before time≤t + 2δ. Then, when each honest player p finishes iterationh, they must multicast
a⟨finalize,h⟩p message, as their timer cannot have fired yet, showing the claim.
Let t′≤ t be the time at which the first honest process enters iteration h. By Lemma 3.4,
all honest processes—including the leader Lh—will have entered iteration h by max(GST,t′ +δ),
implying that t≤t′ +δ (sincet is strictly greater than GST). The earliest an honest timer can fire
is at or after t′ + 3∆>t′ + 3δ≥t + 2δ time (noting that ∆ >δ ), as desired.
Finishing the Proof of Lemma 3.5. It remains to show that this finalized block is proposed by the
leader. Recall that by Subclaim 3.2, every honest player p will have seen a finalized block bh of
heighth by time t + 3δ. Applying Lemma 3.3, we know that bh̸=⊥h. Thus, bh must be proposed
by Lh, because for it to be notarized, some honest player must have voted for it. The lemma
follows.
Theorem 3.2 (Optimistic Confirmation Time) . Simplex has an optimistic confirmation time of
5δ.
Proof. Suppose that there is a set of transactions txs in the view of every honest player by time
t, where t >GST, where txs is not yet in the output of any honest player. Let h be the highest
iteration that any honest player is in at time t. There are two cases. If Lh has not entered iteration
h yet by timet, then by Lemma 3.4, it will enter iterationh by timet+δ, at which point it proposes
a blockchain that contains txs; applying Lemma 3.5 then completes the proof. In the second case,
by time t, Lh has already started iteration h, and by Lemma 3.5 every honest process will be in
iteration h + 1 by time t + 2δ, and see a finalized block from Lh+1 byt + 5δ.
Now, we are ready to reason about worst-case confirmation time.
Lemma 3.6 (The Effect of Faulty Leaders). Suppose every honest process has entered iteration h
by time t, for some t >GST. Then every honest process will have entered iteration h + 1 by time
t + 3∆ +δ.
16
time t
Every honest player 
has entered 
iteration h.
time t + 3Δ
Either every honest 
timer for iteration h 
has fired, or some 
honest process 
entered iteration h+1 
already.
time t + 3Δ + 𝜹
Every honest player 
enters iteration h+1.
If timer fires, multicast 
“vote ⟂h”.
Figure 2: Timeline of events when the leader of iteration h is faulty (t> GST).
Proof. There are two cases. First, suppose that for every honest process, its timer in iterationh fires;
then every honest process p will cast a vote⟨vote,h,⊥h⟩p at some time≤t + 3∆, and subsequently
this vote will be in the view of every honest process by time max( GST,t + 3∆ +δ) = t + 3∆ +δ.
These votes comprise a notarization for ⊥h and thus every honest process will see a notarized
blockchain of height h by time t + 3∆ +δ (if not earlier) and subsequently enter iteration h + 1 as
required. The second case is if an iteration h timer does not fire for some honest process p. Then it
must be that p entered iteration h + 1 at a time before its timer could fire, i.e. before time t + 3∆,
and applying Lemma 3.4 yields the claim.
Theorem 3.3 (Worst-Case Confirmation Time) . Simplex has worst-case confirmation time of
(4δ +ω(logλ)· (3∆ +δ)).
Proof. Suppose that there is a set of transactions txs in the view of every honest player by time
t, where t >GST, where txs is not yet in the output of any honest player. Let h be the highest
iteration that any honest player is in at timet. By Lemma 3.4 every every honest process must have
entered iterationh by timet+δ. Now, suppose that at least one iteration i∈{h+1,...,h +k} has
an honest leader Li, for some choice of k∈ N. Then, applying Lemmas 3.5 and 3.6, every honest
process will see a finalized block containing txs by time t + 4δ +k(3∆ +δ).
It remains to analyze the probability that, in a random execution, there is a sequence of k
iterations in a row h,h + 1,...,h +k− 1 s.t. for every i∈ [k], Lh+i−1 is corrupt. First, observe
that the attacker (and the environment) is PPT, and so there is a polynomial function m(·) s.t.
any execution of the protocol on a security parameter 1 λ must contain at most m(λ) number of
iterations. Fix any λ∈ N. Recall that, for all i∈ [m(λ)], Li is selected using a random oracle, and
is thus corrupt with independent probability f/n≤ 1/3. (Recall that we instantiated the leader
election oracle to be either Li := H∗(i) mod n or Li := H∗(σi) mod n, where H∗ is a random
oracle and σi is a unique threshold signature on i.)
To help, we analyze the probability that in a sequence of m(λ) unbiased coin flips, there is
a consecutive sequence of at least k tails. There are at most ( m(λ)−k + 1)· 2m(λ)−k possible
sequences with at least k consecutive tails, out of 2 m(λ) total; thus the probability is less than
(m(λ)−k+1)
2k . Immediately, the probability there are k corrupt leaders in a row is < (m(λ)−k+1)
2k , since
17
the probability a leader is corrupt is less than the probability an unbiased coin is tails. Observing
that (m(λ)−k+1)
2k is a negligible function in λ when k =ω(logλ), the theorem follows.
For the sake of comparison, we also compute the expected view-based liveness. Recall that it
says that, if every honest process sees some transaction txs before they enter iterationh, once every
honest process enters iteration h, then txs will soon be confirmed:
Theorem 3.4 (Expected View-Based Liveness). Simplex has expected 3.5δ + 1.5∆ view-based live-
ness.
Proof. Fix any iteration h∈ N. Suppose that there is a set of transactions txs in the view of every
honest player before they enter iteration h, and moreover suppose that every honest player entered
iterationh by some timet> GST. Recall that for each iteration i, we defined the leader to be Li :=
H∗(i) mod n, where H∗ is a random oracle (chosen independently of GST and h). Immediately,
for eachi∈ N, Li must be an honest player with independent probability (n−f)/n≥ 2/3. Denote
X the number s.t. Lh+X is honest but, when X >0, Li is faulty∀i where h≤ i < h+X. Here
X is a random variable, and immediately E[X]≤ 3/2− 1 = 1/2. Observe that, importantly, Lh+X
will propose a blockchain that contains txs.
It remains to upper bound the time at which some honest process enters iteration h +X. By
Lemma 3.6, every honest process will have entered iterationh+X by timet+X·(3∆+δ). Applying
Lemma 3.5, we conclude that every honest process will see a finalized block proposed by Lh+X by
time t + 3δ + (X)· (3∆ +δ). Moreover, this block contains txs if not already in a previous block.
Taking the expectation of the time elapsed since t, the theorem statement follows.
3.4 Communication Complexity
Each iteration of the Simplex protocol (without subsampling) requires O(n) multicasts. Note that
we do not make any additional “relay rule assumptions”, unlike other protocols in the multicast
model (e.g. Streamlet [CS20a], Algorand Agreement [CGMV18], PaLa [CPS18]).
Lemma 3.7. In each iteration h, each honest process will multicast at most 4 messages.
Proof. For each iterationh∈ N, an honest process p will multicast at most one propose message, at
most one vote message for a non-⊥ block, at most one of ⟨vote,h,⊥h⟩p and⟨finalize,h⟩p, and will
relay their view of a notarized blockchain of height h at most once.
Each message is at most size O(λε·n) (since a notarization contains up to n signatures of
O(λε) size each, where 0 <ε ≤ 1), so in each iteration, at most O(λε·n2) bits total are multicast
(in the system as a whole, summing over all players). We note that this matches the multicast
bit complexity of the base Algorand Agreement protocol [CGMV18]. By using now standard
techniques, we can bring down the multicast bit complexity to O(λε· polylog(λ)) through sub-
sampling the committee of voters [CM19]. Assuming the sub-exponential security of OWFs, then
the length of a signature can be made to be O(polylog(λ)), yielding a total multicast bit complexity
of O(polylog(λ)). We do not innovate on these methods, and focus on the base protocol.
Multicast can be implemented in various different ways on an underlying communication net-
work. In a point-to-point network, each multicast involves sending the message to every other
player; thus, our protocol—without subsampling—has O(λε·n3) total bit complexity in a point-
to-point setting (counting every bit that was sent in the whole system). However, in modern
18
peer-to-peer networks or gossip networks, peers do not need to directly communicate with every
other peer. In the same vein as e.g. [BCP15, CCG +15] or the implementation of [GHM +17], it
is possible to simulate all-to-all communication if each peer talks to O(polylog(n)) other peers (if
chosen appropriately). Then, total communication can be reduced to O(λε·n2)· polylog(n) bits
(assuming that players do not relay the same message twice when gossiping messages). This may
be reduced further by subsampling (again, following the techniques in Algorand).
We note that many nice works, starting with Hotstuff [YMR +19], propose base protocols that
achieveO(λε·n) bit complexity in a point-to-point setting, when all players are honest. Pessimisti-
cally, the bit complexity is O(λε·n2). Hotstuff and many follow-up works use threshold signatures
to compress the size of notarizations, which requires a private setup, making it unclear how to
do subsampling. Indeed, our protocol with subsampling (without gossip) matches the asymptotic
communication complexity of their base protocols, achieving O(λε· polylog(λ)·n) total bit com-
plexity, orO(polylog(λ)·n) assuming sub-exponentially secure OWFs. Moreover, this bound holds
both pessimistically and optimistically for our protocol, as opposed to just the optimistic case in
Hotstuff.
4 Related Work
The roots of consensus research in the permissioned and partially-synchronous setting dates back
to the seminal paper of [DLS88]. Subsequently, the classical approaches in Paxos [LAM98] and
PBFT [CL+99] became mainstream and were further studied in [KAD+07, GKQV10, MA06, OO14].
These protocols typically adopt an expensive or complex “view-change” phase for switching out a
faulty leader for a new leader, and are built mainly for the stable leader setting, where a single
leader can propose many blocks in a row without ceding its leadership.
More recently, the rise of blockchain applications (in particular, Proof-of-Stake systems) mo-
tivated a new line of work towards building fairer and simpler consensus protocols, where each
leader generally only gets to propose a single block. In particular, Casper FFG [BG17], Hotstuff
(v1) [AGM18], Tendermint [BKM18], and PaLa [CPS18] introduced a new “streamlined” approach
where consensus is reached on many pipelined blocks at once, largely avoiding the complexity of a
dedicated view-change subroutine. All four protocols proceed in incrementing epochs e = 1, 2,...
and have a similar voting rule, where voters vote only for proposals extending the “freshest block”
they’ve seen, that is, the one with the highest epoch number. As a consequence of the voting rule,
the protocols maintain some intricacy when arguing liveness (i.e. the proposer may have to wait
an extra 2∆ before proposing a new block, if the previous proposer crashed). 12 (Note that Simplex
does not have this intricacy.) Somewhat separately, but also building on the streamlined paradigm,
Streamlet [CS20a] achieves a simple protocol description but has worse optimistic and pessimistic
liveness.
PBFT [CL+99] remains the fastest protocol when leaders are honest, requiring only 3δ timesteps
to confirm transactions; [ANRX21] showed that this is optimal in the partially synchronous setting
for f≤n/3. (We mention works such as Parametrized FaB Paxos [MA06] and SBFT [GAG +19],
which achieve even faster optimistic confirmation whenf≤n/5, but this requires that the fraction
of faulty voters also be small, in addition to honest leaders.) However, we are more interested
in the setting with rotating/random leaders, due to issues of fairness. (Random leaders also give
12Sometimes, this is referred to as the ‘hidden lock problem’.
19
Proposal
Conf. Time
Optimistic
Block Time
Expected View-Based
Liveness (γ := n
n−f )
Expected Comm.
Complexity
Simplex 3 δ 2δ 3δ + (γ − 1) · (3∆ + δ) O(n) multicasts†
Algorand*
[CGMV18] 3δ 3δ 3δ + (γ− 1)· (4∆ + 2δ) O(n) multicasts
ICC
[CDH+22] 3δ 2δ 3δ + (γ− 1)· (γ· (2∆ + 2δ) + 2δ) O(n) multicasts
PaLa
[CPS18] 4δ 2δ 4δ + (γ2− 1)· (5∆ +δ) + (γ− 1)· 2δ +γ· 2∆ O(n) multicasts
Pipelined
Fast-Hotstuffˆ
[JNFG20]
Jolteonˆ
[GKKS+22]
5δ 2δ 5δ + (γ3− 1)· (4∆ +δ) + (γ2 +γ− 2)· 2δ O (n2) messages
Chained
Hotstuff (v6)ˆ
[YMR+19]
7δ 2δ 7δ +(γ4−1)·(3∆+δ)+(γ3 +γ2 +γ−3)·2δ O (n2) messages
Streamlet
[CS20a] 6∆ 2∆ 6∆ + ( γ5 +γ4 +γ3 +γ2 +γ− 5)· 2∆ O(n) multicasts
P-Sync Bullshark‡
[SGSKK22b] 6δ 3δ 6δ + (γ− 1)· 18∆ O(n2) messages
Hotstuff (v1)ˆ
[AGM18, Abr22]
Casper FFGˆ
[BG17]
Chained Tendermintˆ
[BKM18, Abr22]
5δ 2δ 5δ + (γ3− 1)· (5∆ +δ) +γ2· 2∆ O(n2) messages
ˆWith random leaders. *Base protocol without sortition, with optimistic responsiveness. †Following the techniques of Algorand [GHM +17], by using
subsampling, many (if not all) of the protocols here built for the multicast model can be adapted to use only polylog(λ) multicasts per block. ‡Assuming
that it takes 3δ to generate a vertex (optimistically), and where the timeout is set to 9∆ according to Section C.2 in [SGSKK22a].
Table 2: Extended Comparison of Popular Consensus Protocols (Random Leaders)
better worst-case confirmation time.) Consequently, many works have adapted PBFT to a set-
ting with rotating leaders; we mention Algorand [CGMV18], Fast-Hotstuff [JNFG20], and Jolteon
[GKKS+22]. In particular, Pipelined Fast-Hotstuff and Jolteon propose streamlined versions of
PBFT-like protocols that also seek to reduce the complexity of the view-change, again by pipelin-
ing proposals; both are slower than Algorand. Algorand and Fast-Hotstuff (without pipelining)
achieve 3δ proposal confirmation time, but worse 3δ block time.
A major concern when designing modern consensus protocols is that of communication com-
plexity. A low communication complexity is essential for a scalable protocol. In the multicast
model, Algorand [CM19] showed an elegant way to subsample the committee of voters to achieve
20
polylog(λ) multicasts (or O(n) messages in the point-to-point model). We remark that their tech-
niques also apply to our protocol. (If we additionally trade off optimistic responsiveness, Algorand
[CM19] can also achieve adaptive security.) In the point-to-point messaging model, a nice line of
works, starting with Hotstuff [YMR+19], seeked to reduce communication complexity by funneling
all messages through the leader (a technique from [Rei94]) and by using threshold signatures to re-
duce the size of certificates (a technique from [CKS00]). Hotstuff, Pipelined Fast-Hotstuff [JNFG20]
and Jolteon [GKKS +22] all achieve O(n) messages per block optimistically, and O(n2) messages
in the case of a faulty leader (or better when amortized over many round-robin leaders, depending
on the implementation of the ‘pacemaker’). It remains unclear how realistic it is to funnel com-
munication through a single leader on a peer-to-peer network. We note that their optimizations
to message size using threshold signatures or aggregate signatures also apply to other protocols; of
course, threshold signatures require a much stronger private setup (e.g. see [CKS00]) that we wish
to avoid. Apart from requiring additional complexity to instantiate the private setup, it is also not
clear how to do subsampling for protocols that require threshold signatures, as an example.
Our protocol has a similar ‘notarize/finalize’ voting procedure to that of [CDH +22] (Dfinity
ICC) and an old variant of Streamlet ([CS20b], Appendix A), but uses different techniques for
proposals and for switching leaders. The ICC protocol [CDH +22] is also quite nice but does not
use timeout/dummy blocks, and incurs some complexity in how they rank leaders and allow multiple
leaders in each round (they additionally assume threshold signatures and a trusted private setup,
which we avoid). Consequently, if the first leader in a round is corrupt, they need essentially two
honest leaders in a row to confirm a subsequent block. It is worth exploring whether their techniques
for block dissemination can be used to improve Simplex. Independently, we also note structural
similarities between Simplex and the Graded Binding Crusader Agreement protocol (using a weak
common coin) in [ABDY22], albeit that protocol is for the asynchronous setting.
In a somewhat distinct line of work, [SGSKK22a] propose a partially-synchronous version of
Bullshark built on top of what they call a DAG. These protocols are well-suited for the asynchronous
setting, but when adapted for partial-synchrony, much care is needed when integrating timeouts
into the DAG construction, to ensure that a slow honest leader is not left behind before it can
propose a block; moreover, it trades-off latency.
We summarize the comparisons in Table 3.4 (for the random leader setting). When computing
the expected view-based liveness, we define a parameter γ := n/(n−f) that corresponds to the
inverse fraction of eligible leaders who are honest. 13 Table 1 presents concrete values for expected
liveness when f =⌈n/3⌉− 1. Importantly, we remark that the landscape of consensus protocols
is rich and ever-changing; this survey may not be comprehensive. In particular, while we compare
only theoretical works here, much has been done to improve the performance of consensus protocols
in practice by the systems community.
5 Other Remarks
In practice, one may in fact choose to run Simplex on three disjoint sets of players: a set of
proposers, a set of validators (who validates blocks and votes for valid blocks only), and a set of
“progress detectors” (who sends finalize votes or ⊥ votes). Members of the validating set do not
13Another reason we use a different variable is to make clear that it is possible to elect leaders from an entirely
different set of processes than the main set of protocol processes; indeed, our protocol supports a setting where most
leaders are corrupt (i.e. γ >3/2) even when the number of faulty voters is required to be small ( f <n/3).
21
send⊥ votes. Importantly, no state needs to be shared across the three roles, making it easy to
distribute the work necessary to run the protocol, and also to incentivize each role in a different
way. For example, the block itself only needs to be delivered to the block validators (and clients).
Bibliography
[AAC+05] Amitanand S Aiyer, Lorenzo Alvisi, Allen Clement, Mike Dahlin, Jean-Philippe Mar-
tin, and Carl Porth. Bar fault tolerance for cooperative services. In Proceedings of
the twentieth ACM symposium on Operating systems principles , pages 45–58, 2005.
[ABDY22] Ittai Abraham, Naama Ben-David, and Sravya Yandamuri. Efficient and adaptively
secure asynchronous binary agreement via binding crusader agreement. Cryptology
ePrint Archive, 2022.
[Abr22] Ittai Abraham. Two round hotstuff. https://decentralizedthoughts.github.io/
2022-11-24-two-round-HS/ , 2022. Accessed: 2022-12-30.
[AGM18] Ittai Abraham, Guy Gueta, and Dahlia Malkhi. Hot-stuff the linear, optimal-
resilience, one-message bft devil. CoRR, abs/1803.05069, 2018.
[AJK+22] Sarah Allen, Ari Juels, Mukti Khaire, Tyler Kell, and Siddhant Shrivastava. Nfts for
art and collectables: Primer and outlook. 2022.
[AMS19] Ittai Abraham, Dahlia Malkhi, and Alexander Spiegelman. Asymptotically optimal
validated asynchronous byzantine agreement. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Sym-
posium on Principles of Distributed Computing , pages 337–346, 2019.
[ANRX21] Ittai Abraham, Kartik Nayak, Ling Ren, and Zhuolun Xiang. Good-case latency of
byzantine broadcast: A complete categorization. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM
Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing , pages 331–341, 2021.
[Apa] Apache Software Foundation. ZooKeeper internals. https://zookeeper.apache.
org/doc/r3.4.13/zookeeperInternals.html. Accessed: 2023-02-24.
[B+14] Vitalik Buterin et al. A next-generation smart contract and decentralized application
platform. white paper, 3(37):2–1, 2014.
[BCC+19] Mathieu Baudet, Avery Ching, Andrey Chursin, George Danezis, Fran¸ cois Garillot,
Zekun Li, Dahlia Malkhi, Oded Naor, Dmitri Perelman, and Alberto Sonnino. State
machine replication in the libra blockchain. The Libra Assn., Tech. Rep , 7, 2019.
[BCNP04] Boaz Barak, Ran Canetti, Jesper Buus Nielsen, and Rafael Pass. Universally com-
posable protocols with relaxed set-up assumptions. In 45th Annual IEEE Symposium
on Foundations of Computer Science , pages 186–195. IEEE, 2004.
[BCP15] Elette Boyle, Kai-Min Chung, and Rafael Pass. Large-scale secure computation:
Multi-party computation for (parallel) ram programs. In Advances in Cryptology–
CRYPTO 2015: 35th Annual Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, Au-
gust 16-20, 2015, Proceedings, Part II , pages 742–762. Springer, 2015.
22
[BDD+21] Carsten Baum, Bernardo David, Rafael Dowsley, Jesper Buus Nielsen, and Sabine
Oechsner. Tardis: a foundation of time-lock puzzles in uc. In Annual International
Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques , pages 429–
459. Springer, 2021.
[BG17] Vitalik Buterin and Virgil Griffith. Casper the friendly finality gadget. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.09437, 2017.
[BKM18] Ethan Buchman, Jae Kwon, and Zarko Milosevic. The latest gossip on bft consensus.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.04938 , 2018.
[BMM14] Michael Backes, Praveen Manoharan, and Esfandiar Mohammadi. Tuc: Time-
sensitive and modular analysis of anonymous communication. In 2014 IEEE 27th
Computer Security Foundations Symposium , pages 383–397. IEEE, 2014.
[Bur06] Mike Burrows. The chubby lock service for loosely-coupled distributed systems. In
Proceedings of the 7th symposium on Operating systems design and implementation ,
pages 335–350, 2006.
[Can01] Ran Canetti. Universally composable security: A new paradigm for cryptographic
protocols. In Proceedings 42nd IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Sci-
ence, pages 136–145. IEEE, 2001.
[CCG+15] Nishanth Chandran, Wutichai Chongchitmate, Juan A Garay, Shafi Goldwasser,
Rafail Ostrovsky, and Vassilis Zikas. The hidden graph model: Communication local-
ity and optimal resiliency with adaptive faults. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference
on Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science , pages 153–162, 2015.
[CDH+22] Jan Camenisch, Manu Drijvers, Timo Hanke, Yvonne-Anne Pignolet, Victor Shoup,
and Dominic Williams. Internet computer consensus. In Proceedings of the 2022
ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing , pages 81–91, 2022.
[CGMV18] Jing Chen, Sergey Gorbunov, Silvio Micali, and Georgios Vlachos. Algorand agree-
ment: Super fast and partition resilient byzantine agreement. Cryptology ePrint
Archive, 2018.
[CHMV17] Ran Canetti, Kyle Hogan, Aanchal Malhotra, and Mayank Varia. A universally
composable treatment of network time. In 2017 IEEE 30th Computer Security Foun-
dations Symposium (CSF) , pages 360–375. IEEE, 2017.
[CKS00] Christian Cachin, Klaus Kursawe, and Victor Shoup. Random oracles in con-
stantinopole: practical asynchronous byzantine agreement using cryptography. In
Proceedings of the nineteenth annual ACM symposium on Principles of distributed
computing, pages 123–132, 2000.
[CL+99] Miguel Castro, Barbara Liskov, et al. Practical byzantine fault tolerance. In OsDI,
volume 99, pages 173–186, 1999.
[CM19] Jing Chen and Silvio Micali. Algorand: A secure and efficient distributed ledger.
Theoretical Computer Science, 777:155–183, 2019.
23
[CPS18] TH Hubert Chan, Rafael Pass, and Elaine Shi. Pala: A simple partially synchronous
blockchain. Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2018.
[CR93] Ran Canetti and Tal Rabin. Fast asynchronous byzantine agreement with optimal
resilience. In Proceedings of the twenty-fifth annual ACM symposium on Theory of
computing, pages 42–51, 1993.
[CS20a] Benjamin Y Chan and Elaine Shi. Streamlet: Textbook streamlined blockchains.
In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Conference on Advances in Financial Technologies ,
pages 1–11, 2020.
[CS20b] Benjamin Y Chan and Elaine Shi. Streamlet: Textbook streamlined blockchains (ear-
lier version). Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2020/088, 2020. https://eprint.
iacr.org/archive/2020/088/20200204:124247.
[DGK+20] Philip Daian, Steven Goldfeder, Tyler Kell, Yunqi Li, Xueyuan Zhao, Iddo Bentov,
Lorenz Breidenbach, and Ari Juels. Flash boys 2.0: Frontrunning in decentralized ex-
changes, miner extractable value, and consensus instability. In2020 IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy (SP) , pages 910–927. IEEE, 2020.
[DLS88] Cynthia Dwork, Nancy Lynch, and Larry Stockmeyer. Consensus in the presence of
partial synchrony. Journal of the ACM (JACM) , 35(2):288–323, 1988.
[GAG+19] Guy Golan Gueta, Ittai Abraham, Shelly Grossman, Dahlia Malkhi, Benny Pinkas,
Michael Reiter, Dragos-Adrian Seredinschi, Orr Tamir, and Alin Tomescu. Sbft:
a scalable and decentralized trust infrastructure. In 2019 49th Annual IEEE/IFIP
international conference on dependable systems and networks (DSN) , pages 568–580.
IEEE, 2019.
[GHM+17] Yossi Gilad, Rotem Hemo, Silvio Micali, Georgios Vlachos, and Nickolai Zeldovich.
Algorand: Scaling byzantine agreements for cryptocurrencies. In Proceedings of the
26th symposium on operating systems principles , pages 51–68, 2017.
[GKKS+22] Rati Gelashvili, Lefteris Kokoris-Kogias, Alberto Sonnino, Alexander Spiegelman,
and Zhuolun Xiang. Jolteon and ditto: Network-adaptive efficient consensus with
asynchronous fallback. In Financial Cryptography and Data Security: 26th Interna-
tional Conference, FC 2022, Grenada, May 2–6, 2022, Revised Selected Papers, pages
296–315. Springer, 2022.
[GKL15] Juan Garay, Aggelos Kiayias, and Nikos Leonardos. The bitcoin backbone protocol:
Analysis and applications. In Advances in Cryptology-EUROCRYPT 2015: 34th
Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic
Techniques, Sofia, Bulgaria, April 26-30, 2015, Proceedings, Part II , pages 281–310.
Springer, 2015.
[GKQV10] Rachid Guerraoui, Nikola Kneˇ zevi´ c, Vivien Qu´ ema, and Marko Vukoli´ c. The next 700
bft protocols. In Proceedings of the 5th European Conference on Computer Systems ,
EuroSys ’10, pages 363–376, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.
24
[HCPS19] T-H Hubert Chan, Rafael Pass, and Elaine Shi. Consensus through herding. In
Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic
Techniques, pages 720–749. Springer, 2019.
[HILL99] Johan H˚ astad, Russell Impagliazzo, Leonid A Levin, and Michael Luby. A pseudoran-
dom generator from any one-way function. SIAM Journal on Computing, 28(4):1364–
1396, 1999.
[JNFG20] Mohammad M Jalalzai, Jianyu Niu, Chen Feng, and Fangyu Gai. Fast-hotstuff: A
fast and resilient hotstuff protocol. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11454 , 2020.
[KAD+07] Ramakrishna Kotla, Lorenzo Alvisi, Michael Dahlin, Allen Clement, and Edmund L.
Wong. Zyzzyva: speculative byzantine fault tolerance. In Proceedings of the 21st
ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles 2007, SOSP 2007, Stevenson,
Washington, USA, October 14-17, 2007 , pages 45–58, 2007.
[KKKNS21] Idit Keidar, Eleftherios Kokoris-Kogias, Oded Naor, and Alexander Spiegelman. All
you need is dag. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Symposium on Principles of Dis-
tributed Computing, pages 165–175, 2021.
[KLP05] Yael Tauman Kalai, Yehuda Lindell, and Manoj Prabhakaran. Concurrent general
composition of secure protocols in the timing model. In Proceedings of the thirty-
seventh annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 644–653, 2005.
[KMTZ13] Jonathan Katz, Ueli Maurer, Bj¨ orn Tackmann, and Vassilis Zikas. Universally com-
posable synchronous computation. In Theory of Cryptography Conference , pages
477–498. Springer, 2013.
[KZGJ20] Mahimna Kelkar, Fan Zhang, Steven Goldfeder, and Ari Juels. Order-fairness for
byzantine consensus. In Advances in Cryptology–CRYPTO 2020: 40th Annual Inter-
national Cryptology Conference, CRYPTO 2020, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August
17–21, 2020, Proceedings, Part III 40 , pages 451–480. Springer, 2020.
[KZZ16] Aggelos Kiayias, Hong-Sheng Zhou, and Vassilis Zikas. Fair and robust multi-party
computation using a global transaction ledger. InAnnual International Conference on
the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques , pages 705–734. Springer,
2016.
[LAM98] LESLIE LAMPORT. The part-time parliament. ACM Transactions on Computer
Systems, 16(2):133–169, 1998.
[Lam01] Leslie Lamport. Paxos made simple. ACM SIGACT News (Distributed Computing
Column) 32, 4 (Whole Number 121, December 2001) , pages 51–58, 2001.
[LSP82] LESLIE LAMPORT, ROBERT SHOSTAK, and MARSHALL PEASE. The byzan-
tine generals problem. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems ,
4(3):382–401, 1982.
[MA06] Jean-Philippe Martin and Lorenzo Alvisi. Fast byzantine consensus. IEEE Trans.
Dependable Secur. Comput., 3(3), 2006.
25
[MXC+16] Andrew Miller, Yu Xia, Kyle Croman, Elaine Shi, and Dawn Song. The honey badger
of bft protocols. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer
and communications security, pages 31–42, 2016.
[Nak08] Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Decentralized
business review, page 21260, 2008.
[OO14] Diego Ongaro and John Ousterhout. In search of an understandable consensus algo-
rithm. In Proceedings of the 2014 USENIX Conference on USENIX Annual Technical
Conference, USENIX ATC’14, page 305–320, USA, 2014. USENIX Association.
[PS17] Rafael Pass and Elaine Shi. The sleepy model of consensus. In International Confer-
ence on the Theory and Application of Cryptology and Information Security , pages
380–409. Springer, 2017.
[PS18] Rafael Pass and Elaine Shi. Thunderella: Blockchains with optimistic instant con-
firmation. In Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of
Cryptographic Techniques, pages 3–33. Springer, 2018.
[Rab83] Michael O Rabin. Randomized byzantine generals. In 24th annual symposium on
foundations of computer science (sfcs 1983) , pages 403–409. IEEE, 1983.
[Rei94] Michael K Reiter. Secure agreement protocols: Reliable and atomic group multicast
in rampart. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Conference on Computer and Commu-
nications Security, pages 68–80, 1994.
[Rom90] John Rompel. One-way functions are necessary and sufficient for secure signatures.
In Proceedings of the twenty-second annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing,
pages 387–394, 1990.
[SGSKK22a] Alexander Spiegelman, Neil Giridharan, Alberto Sonnino, and Lefteris Kokoris-
Kogias. Bullshark: Dag bft protocols made practical. In Proceedings of the 2022
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security , pages 2705–
2718, 2022.
[SGSKK22b] Alexander Spiegelman, Neil Giridharan, Alberto Sonnino, and Lefteris Kokoris-
Kogias. Bullshark: The partially synchronous version. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2209.05633, 2022.
[WLG+78] John H Wensley, Leslie Lamport, Jack Goldberg, Milton W Green, Karl N Levitt,
Po Mo Melliar-Smith, Robert E Shostak, and Charles B Weinstock. Sift: Design and
analysis of a fault-tolerant computer for aircraft control. Proceedings of the IEEE ,
66(10):1240–1255, 1978.
[Yao82] Andrew C Yao. Protocols for secure computations. In 23rd annual symposium on
foundations of computer science (sfcs 1982) , pages 160–164. IEEE, 1982.
[YMR+19] Maofan Yin, Dahlia Malkhi, Michael K Reiter, Guy Golan Gueta, and Ittai Abraham.
Hotstuff: Bft consensus with linearity and responsiveness. In Proceedings of the 2019
ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing , pages 347–356, 2019.
26