Blockchain CAP Theorem Allows
User-Dependent Adaptivity and Finality
Suryanarayana Sankagiri1⋆, Xuechao Wang1⋆, Sreeram Kannan 2, and Pramod
Viswanath1
1 University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign IL 61801
2 University of Washington at Seattle, WA
Abstract. Longest-chain blockchain protocols, such as Bitcoin, guar-
antee liveness even when the number of actively participating users is
variable, i.e., they are adaptive. However, they are not safe under net-
work partitions, i.e., they do not guarantee ﬁnality. On the other hand,
classical blockchain protocols, like PBFT, achieve ﬁnality but not adap-
tivity. Indeed, the CAP theorem in the context of blockchains asserts
that no protocol can simultaneously oﬀer both adaptivity and ﬁnality.
We propose a new blockchain protocol, called the checkpointed longest
chain, that oﬀers individual users the choice between ﬁnality and adap-
tivity instead of imposing it at a system-wide level. This protocol’s salient
feature is that it supports two distinct conﬁrmation rules: one that guar-
antees adaptivity and the other ﬁnality. The more optimistic adaptive
rule always conﬁrms blocks that are marked as ﬁnalized by the more
conservative rule, and may possibly conﬁrm more blocks during variable
participation levels. Clients (users) make a local choice between the con-
ﬁrmation rules as per their personal preference, while miners follow a
ﬁxed block proposal rule that is consistent with both conﬁrmation rules.
The proposed protocol has the additional beneﬁt of intrinsic validity: the
ﬁnalized blocks always lie on a single blockchain, and therefore miners
can attest to the validity of transactions while proposing blocks. Our
protocol builds on the notion of a ﬁnality gadget, a popular technique
for adding ﬁnality to longest-chain protocols.
1 Introduction
The longest-chain protocol, introduced by Nakamoto in Bitcoin [18], is the pro-
totypical example of a blockchain protocol that operates in a permissionless
setting. Put diﬀerently, the longest-chain protocol is adaptive: it remain safe and
live irrespective of the number of active participants (nodes) in the system, as
long as the fraction of adversarial nodes among the active ones is less than a
half. Adaptivity (also known as dynamic availability) is a desirable property in
a highly decentralized system such as a cryptocurrency. The downside of this
protocol is that they are insecure during prolonged periods of network partition
⋆ The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this work.
arXiv:2010.13711v2  [cs.CR]  2 Apr 2021
2 S. Sankagiri et al.
(asynchrony). This is unavoidable; miners in disconnected portions of the net-
work keep extending their blockchains separately, unaware of the other chains.
When synchrony resumes, one of the chains wins, which implies that blocks on
the other chains get unconﬁrmed. These features are present not just in the
longest-chain protocol, but also in other protocols that are derived from it, e.g.,
Prism [1].
In stark contrast, committee-based consensus protocols like PBFT [4] and
Hotstuﬀ [25] oﬀer strong ﬁnality guarantees. These protocols remain safe even
during periods of asynchrony, and regain liveness when synchrony resumes. Fi-
nality is also a desirable property for blockchains, as they may operate under
conditions where synchrony cannot be guaranteed at all times. However, all
ﬁnality-guaranteeing protocols come with a caveat: they are built for the per-
missioned setting. These protocols make progress only when enough number of
votes have been accrued for each block. If a signiﬁcant fraction of nodes become
inactive (go oﬄine), the protocol stalls completely. This prevents them from
being adaptive.
We posit that the two disparate class of protocols is a consequence of the
CAP theorem, a famous impossibility result in distributed systems. The theorem
states that in the presence of a network partition, a distributed system cannot
guarantee both consistency (safety) and availability (liveness) [13, 14]. The the-
orem has led to a classiﬁcation of system designs, on the basis of whether they
favor liveness or safety during network partitions. Blockchains, being distributed
systems, inherit the trade-oﬀs implicated by the CAP theorem. In particular, we
see that the longest-chain class of protocols favor liveness while the committee-
based protocols favor safety.
Recently, Lewis-Pye and Roughgarden [16] prove a CAP theorem for block-
chains that highlights the adaptivity-ﬁnality trade-oﬀ explicitly. They show that
“a fundamental dichotomy holds between protocols (such as Bitcoin) that are
adaptive, in the sense that they can function given unpredictable levels of par-
ticipation, and protocols (such as Algorand) that have certain ﬁnality proper-
ties”. The essence of this impossibility result is the following: it is diﬃcult to
distinguish network asynchrony from a reduced number of participants in the
blockchain system. Therefore, a protocol is bound to behave similarly under
both these conditions. In particular, adaptive protocols must continue to extend
blockchains during asynchrony (thereby compromising ﬁnality), while ﬁnality-
guaranteeing protocols must stall under reduced participation (which means they
cannot have adaptivity).
In this paper, we investigate whether the aforementioned trade-oﬀ between
adaptivity and ﬁnality can be resolved at a user level, rather than at a system-
wide level. In particular, we seek to build a blockchain system wherein all (hon-
est) nodes follow a common block proposing mechanism, but diﬀerent nodes can
choose between two diﬀerent conﬁrmation rules . Under appropriate bounds on
adversarial participation, one rule must guarantee adaptivity, while the other
must guarantee ﬁnality. When the system is operating under desirable condi-
tions, i.e., a large enough fraction of nodes are active and the network is syn-
Blockchain CAP Theorem Allows User-Dependent Adaptivity and Finality 3
chronous, the blocks conﬁrmed by both rules must coincide. Protocols with such
a dual-conﬁrmation rule (aka dual-ledger) design are termed as “Ebb-and-ﬂow”
protocols in [19]. Such a design would be of interest in blockchains for many rea-
sons. For example, for low-value transactions such as buying a coﬀee, a node may
prefer liveness over safety, whereas for high-value transactions, it is natural to
choose safety over liveness. Moreover, such a trade-oﬀ allows each node to make
their own assumptions about the state of the network and choose a conﬁrmation
rule appropriately.
At a high level, we are inspired in our formulation from analogous designs
to adapt the CAP theorem in practical distributed system settings (Section 4
of [14]). More concretely, dual-ledger designs do not fall under the purview of
the CAP theorem of [16]; the formulation assumes a single conﬁrmation rule.
A second motivation is that a variety of ﬁnality gadgets (in combination with
a blockchain protocol) may also be viewed as providing a user-dependent dual
ledger option. We elaborate on some recent proposals in [10,15,24] in §2.
1.1 Our contributions
Our main contribution is to propose a new protocol, called the checkpointed
longest chain protocol, which oﬀers each node in the same blockchain system a
choice between two diﬀerent conﬁrmation rules that have diﬀerent adaptivity-
ﬁnality trade-oﬀs.
– Block Proposal . Just as in the longest chain protocol, honest miners build
new blocks by extending the chain that they currently hold. In addition, some
honest users participate in a separate checkpointing protocol, that marks
certain blocks as checkpoints at regular intervals. An honest user adopts the
longest chain that contains the latest checkpoint .
– Conﬁrmation rules . The protocol’s adaptivity-guaranteeing conﬁrmation
rule is simply the k-deep rule. An honest user conﬁrms a block if it sees
k blocks below it, for an appropriate choice of k. The protocol’s ﬁnality-
guaranteeing rule is for honest users to treat all blocks in its chain up to the
last checkpointed block as conﬁrmed.
The protocol is designed such that new blocks continue to be mined at increasing
heights even if the participation level is low, but new checkpoints appear only
if there is suﬃcient participation. This illustrates the adaptivity-guaranteeing
property of the k-deep rule. On the other hand, checkpoints are guaranteed to
be on a single chain irrespective of network conditions, while the longest chain
containing the latest checkpoint may keep alternating between divergent chains.
This implies the ﬁnality property of the checkpointing rule.
Below, we highlight the key design principles of our protocol, followed by the
security guarantees.
Validity of Blockchains Our protocol keeps intact the intrinsic validity of
blockchains. Roughly, validity means that the set of blocks that are conﬁrmed all
4 S. Sankagiri et al.
lie on a single, monotonically increasing chain. Thus, the validity of a transaction
can be inferred from just the blockchain leading up to the particular block. More
precisely, an honest user that is constructing the block has the assurance that if
the block is conﬁrmed, all transactions in the block are conﬁrmed, which means
it accrues all the transaction rewards. Moreover, a user can infer that a certain
transaction is conﬁrmed simply by knowing that the transaction was included in
a particular block and that the block was conﬁrmed (as per either rule), without
knowledge of the contents of other blocks. These properties are recognized to
be important for the blockchain to be incentive-compatible and to enable light
clients respectively. Further, validity of blockchains oﬀers spam-resistance and
is compatible with existing sharding designs. Although validity of blockchains is
a common feature of a majority of protocols, recent high performance designs
crucially decouple validation from consensus [1, 11]. The Snap-and-Chat design
of [19] for the same problem also does not have this feature.
Fig. 1. The Checkpointed Longest Chain
Interaction between Checkpointing and Longest Chain Protocol In our
design, the longest chain rule (i.e., the block proposal rule) and the checkpointing
rule satisfy some constraints with respect to each other. The interlocking struc-
ture of constraints between the checkpointing protocol and the longest chain
protocol is illustrated in Figure 1.1 and detailed below.
– P1: Consistency with previous checkpoints. The sequence of check-
points must be on a chain. This places a self-consistency condition on the
checkpointing protocol.
– P2: Checkpointed longest chain rule. The longest chain protocol respect
the previous checkpoints. Honest users build adopt the longest chain that
contains the latest checkpoint and mine new blocks at the tip of this chain.
– P3: Checkpoints are deep enough. The checkpointing protocol should
only checkpoint blocks that are suﬃciently deep in some honestly held chain.
Furthermore, such a chain should be made available along with the check-
point message.
Blockchain CAP Theorem Allows User-Dependent Adaptivity and Finality 5
All these three conditions are required to achieve our goals. Condition P1
is a requisite for a validity preserving protocol (in particular, a validity preserv-
ing, ﬁnality-guaranteeing conﬁrmation rule). The condition P2 says that honest
nodes should adopt the longest checkpointed chain, rather than the longest chain.
Given P1, the condition P2 is required to ensure new checkpoints are produced
after a period of asynchrony. Without this condition P2, the block proposal rule
is simply the longest chain rule. During asynchrony, the longest chain may be
one that does not include some of the checkpoints, and there is no correction
mechanism to ever bring the longest chain downstream of the last checkpoint.
Condition P3 ensures that during synchrony, any block that is eventually check-
pointed would be a part of all honestly held chains. Thus, the dynamics of the
protocol would be as if nodes are simply following the longest chain rule, and
the known security guarantees would apply. If no such condition is placed, the
checkpointing protocol could checkpoint an arbitrary block that possibly forks
from the main chain by a large margin. The rule P2 would force honest nodes
to switch to this fork, thereby violating safety of the k-deep rule.
The Checkpointing Protocol The checkpointing protocol in our design is
a BFT consensus protocol. It is a slight modiﬁcation of Algorand BA, that
is presented in [6]. The protocol is extended from a single-iteration byzantine
agreement protocol to a multi-iteration checkpointing protocol. In each itera-
tion, nodes run the checkpointing protocol to checkpoint a new block, and P1
guarantees that the sequence of checkpoints lie on a single chain. Coupled with
the chain adoption rule (longest checkpointed chain), these checkpoints oﬀer
deterministic ﬁnality and safety against network partitions.
We state the safety guarantee of the checkpointing protocol as a basic check-
pointing property (CP) as below:
– CP0: Safety. All honest users checkpoint the same block in one iteration of
the checkpointing protocol, even during network partition. This checkpoint
lies on the same chain as all previous checkpoints.
While one might consider diﬀerent protocols for the checkpointing mecha-
nism, the protocol must further satisfy some key properties during periods of
synchrony.
– CP1: Recency condition. If a new block is checkpointed at some time, it
must have been in a chain held by an honest user at some point in the recent
past.
– CP2: Gap in checkpoints. The interval between successive checkpoints
must be large enough to allow CP1 to hold.
– CP3: Conditional liveness. If all honest nodes hold chains that have
a common preﬁx (all but the last few blocks are common), then a new
checkpoint will appear within a certain bounded time (i.e., there is an upper
bound on the interval between two successive checkpoints).
6 S. Sankagiri et al.
CP1 helps in bounding the extent to which an honest user may have to
drop honest blocks in its chain when it adopts a new checkpoint. Without this
condition, (i.e., if arbitrarily old checkpoints can be issued), honest users may
have to let go of many honestly mined blocks. This causes a loss in mining power,
which we refer to asbleeding. Our choice of Algorand BA was made because it has
this property. Other natural candidates such as PBFT [4] and HotStuﬀ [25], do
not have this property. We discuss this in detail in Appendix D. CP2 ensures
that the loss in honest mining power due to the above mechanism is limited.
This condition can be incorporated by design. CP3 is a liveness property of the
checkpointing protocol. It ensures new checkpoints appear at frequent intervals,
leading to liveness of the ﬁnality-guaranteeing conﬁrmation rule.
Security Guarantees (Informal) We show the following guarantees for proof-
of-work longest chain along with Algorand BA (augmented with the appropriate
validity condition).
1. The k-deep rule is safe and live if the network is synchronous from the
beginning and the fraction of adversaries among online users is less than a
half.
2. The checkpointing protocol, which is safe by design, is also live soon after
the network partition is healed under the partially synchronous model.
3. The ledger from the checkpoint rule is a preﬁx of the ledger from the k-deep
rule from the point of view of any user.
Proof Technique We prove these security guarantees using the following strat-
egy. First, we show that if all honest users hold chains that obey the k-common
preﬁx condition for an extended period of time, then new blocks get checkpointed
at regular intervals, and these blocks are part of the common preﬁx of the hon-
estly held chains. This tells us that under conditions in which the vanilla longest
chain rule is secure, the checkpointed longest chain rule has exactly the same
dynamics. It therefore inherits the same security properties of the longest chain
rule. Secondly, we show that once suﬃcient time has passed after a network
partition is healed, the chains held by the honest user under the checkpointed
longest chain rule are guaranteed to have the common preﬁx property. Coupled
with the ﬁrst result, we infer that new checkpoints will eventually be conﬁrmed
thereby proving liveness of the checkpoint-based conﬁrmation rule under partial
synchrony.
Outline We review related works in §2 and place our results in the context
of several recent works on the same topic as this paper. The similarities and
diﬀerences in the techniques in our work with closely related works is pictorially
illustrated in Figure 2. We state our network and security models formally in §3.
In §4, we describe the checkpointed longest chain protocol, highlighting the roles
of the miners and precisely stating the two conﬁrmation rules. For clarity, we
describe the checkpointing protocol as a black box with certain properties here;
Blockchain CAP Theorem Allows User-Dependent Adaptivity and Finality 7
we give the full protocol in Appendix A. We state our main theorem, concerning
the security guarantees of our protocol, in §5. In the rest of the section, we give
a proof sketch of the theorem. The formal proofs are given in Appendices B and
C. We conclude the paper with a discussion and pointers for future work in §6.
2 Related Work
CAP Theorem The formal connection between the CAP theorem to block-
chains is recently made in [16], by providing an abstract framework in which a
wide class of blockchain protocols can be placed, including longest chain proto-
cols (both Proof-of-Work based [12] and PoS based, e.g., [8]) as well as BFT-
style protocols (e.g., [7]). The main result of [16] says that a protocol (containing
a block “encoding” procedure and a block conﬁrmation rule) which is adaptive
(i.e., which remains live in an unsized setting) cannot oﬀer ﬁnality (i.e., determin-
istic safety, even under arbitrary network conditions) and vice-versa. However,
the same paper is mute on the topic of whether diﬀerent block conﬁrmation rules
could oﬀer diﬀerent guarantees, which is the entire focus of this work. We are
inspired in our formulation from analogous designs to adapt the CAP theorem
in practical distributed system settings (Section 4 of [14]).
User-Dependent Conﬁrmation Rules The idea of giving users the option of
choosing their own conﬁrmation rule, based on their beliefs about the network
conditions and desired security level was pioneered by Nakamoto themself, via
choosing the value ofk in thek-deep conﬁrmation rule. A recent work [17] allows
users the option of choosing between partially synchronous conﬁrmation rule and
a synchronous one. However, neither of the conﬁrmation rules are adaptive, as
the block proposal rule itself is a committee-based one and cannot make progress
once the participation is below a required level. Therefore, they do not “break”
the CAP theorem as proposed in [16]. In contrast, our protocol oﬀers users the
choice of an adaptive system.
Hybrid Consensus Hybrid consensus [21] is a diﬀerent technique of incorpo-
rating a BFT protocol into the longest-chain protocol. In a nutshell, the idea in
this design is to use the longest-chain protocol to randomly select a committee,
which then executes a BFT protocol to conﬁrm blocks. The committee consists
of the miners of the blocks on the longest chain over a shifting interval of constant
size, and is thus re-elected periodically. Hybrid consensus addresses the problem
of building a responsive protocol (i.e., latency proportional to network delay) in
a PoW setting. It does not, however, address the adaptivity-ﬁnality dilemma. In
fact, as we illustrate here, the protocol oﬀers neither adaptivity nor ﬁnality. Once
a miner is elected as a committee member, it is obliged to stay active until the
period of its committee is over, which compromises on the adaptivity property.
As for ﬁnality, although the blocks are conﬁrmed by a ﬁnality-based protocol,
the committee election mechanism compromises the ﬁnality guarantee. During
asynchrony, nodes cannot achieve consensus on who belongs to the committee,
and thus the whole protocol loses safety.
8 S. Sankagiri et al.
Fig. 2. Four related works in our framework (counterclockwise): In Ebb-and-Flow [19],
previous checkpoints are not respected by either the longest chain protocol or the
checkpointing protocol. Hence checkpoints may not form a single chain and the ﬁnal
ledger is constructed by sanitization, which makes it impossible to have validation be-
fore block proposal. Afgjort [10] takes an oﬀ-the-shelf longest chain protocol and keeps
checkpointing blocks on it. Due to lack of interaction between the longest chain pro-
tocol and the checkpointing protocol, the protocol may fail in a partially synchronous
setting when the security of the blockchain is broken. The Checkpointed Ledger [15]
and GRANDPA [24] are very similar to our design; the diﬀerence is that the check-
points don’t need to be buried deep enough in the longest chain. This minor change
makes their protocols become insecure under the variable participation setting.
Checkpointing is a protocol run on top of the longest chain protocol (run by
largely honest parties) that deterministically marks certain blocks as ﬁnalized;
a simple form of checkpointing was pioneered, and maintained until 2014, by
Satoshi Nakamoto (presumably honest). In the context of our work, checkpoint-
ing provides ﬁnality (essentially by ﬁat) while the longest chain rule ensures
adaptivity. We can interpret our paper as an attempt to provide appropriate
conditions on the interaction between the checkpointing and the longest chain
protocol, and also to show how to realize such checkpointing in a distributed
manner. We note that [15] is a recent work that studies the checkpointed ledger
when the longest-chain protocol has super-majority adversaries; this regime is
diﬀerent from that studied in the present paper, where we assume that the
longest-chain protocol has majority honest and the checkpointing protocol has
2/3 honest users. For completeness, we have included the architecture of check-
pointed ledger in the comparison in Figure 2.
Casper FFG and Gasper Casper FFG ( Casper: the Friendly Finality Gad-
get), presented in [2], pioneered the study of ﬁnality gadgets. Casper FFG also
introduced the notion of “economic security”. The ﬁnality gadget allows cryp-
tographic proofs of malicious behavior which can be used to disincentivize such
behavior. We do not explore this aspect of ﬁnality gadgets in our paper. Casper
FFG, as presented in [2], is not a completely speciﬁed protocol. A recent follow-
up paper called Gasper [3] provides a complete protocol. Gasper can be viewed
as a checkpointed longest chain protocol, with the longest chain rule replaced by
Blockchain CAP Theorem Allows User-Dependent Adaptivity and Finality 9
the Latest Message Driven Greediest Heaviest Observed Subtree (LMD GHOST)
rule and the checkpointing protocol being Casper FFG. Gasper does not provide
formal security guarantees; in fact, the work by Neu et al. [19] shows a liveness
attack on Gasper.
Afgjort Afgjort [10] is a recent ﬁnality gadget proposed by Dinsdale et al., which
formally describes the desirable properties that a ﬁnality gadget must have, some
of them are similar to the ones we require as well. Afgjort has a two-layer design:
it takes an oﬀ-the-shelf longest chain protocol and adds a ﬁnality layer to it. Such
a system can work as desired when the network is synchronous, including when
the participation levels are variable. However, it is destined to fail in one of two
ways in a partially synchronous setting: either the ﬁnality gadget stops ﬁnalizing
new blocks (i.e., violates liveness), or it ﬁnalizes “conﬂicting” blocks, i.e., blocks
in two diﬀerent chains (i.e., violates validity). Thus Afgjort does not provide the
guarantees we seek in this work. More generally, any layer-two ﬁnality gadget on
top of an adaptive protocol would not meet the desired objectives for the same
reason; they would be missing rule P2 (see Figure 2).
GRANDPA GRANDPA [24] is another recent ﬁnality gadget, proposed by
Stewart et al. Just as in our protocol (and unlike Afgjort), GRANDPA alters
the underlying block production mechanism to respect blocks that has been
ﬁnalized by the ﬁnality gadget. GRANDPA’s security relies on the assumption
that the block-production mechanism (longest-chain rule/GHOST) provides a
type of “conditional eventual consensus”. I.e., If nodes keep building on the
last ﬁnalized block and don’t ﬁnalize any new blocks, then eventually they have
consensus on a longer chain. This argument, though presumably true, is not
a rigorous security analysis; in our work, we prove security for a completely
speciﬁed model and protocol.
More importantly, comparing Figures 1.1 and 2, we see that GRANDPA does
not have property P3. This leads to a security vulnerability in the variable par-
ticipation setting. The issue arises due to the following subtlety: in the variable
participation setting, a particular block could be ‘locked’ onto by the check-
pointing protocol, but could be checkpointed much later (this does not happen
under full participation). A block at the tip of the longest chain could soon be
displaced from it by the adversary. If this block is locked while it is on the chain,
but checkpointed only when it is out of the chain, the safety of the k-deep rule
will be violated. A more detailed description of this attack is given in Appendix
D.
Snap-and-Chat protocols A concurrent work by Neu et al. [19] also solves
the adaptivity vs ﬁnality dilemma posed by the CAP theorem. (Their work
appeared online a few weeks prior to ours). They introduce a technique, called
Snap-and-Chat, to combine a longest chain protocol with any BFT-style one
to obtain a protocol that has the properties we desire. More speciﬁcally, their
protocol produces two diﬀerent ledgers (ordered list of transactions), one that
oﬀers adaptivity and the other that oﬀers ﬁnality. A user can choose to pick
either one, depending on its belief about the network condition. These ledgers
are proven to be consistent with each other (the ﬁnality guaranteeing ledger is a
10 S. Sankagiri et al.
preﬁx of the adaptive one). While the outcomes of the design of [19] are analogous
to ours, the approach adopted and the resulting blockchain protocol are quite
diﬀerent. A major advantage of the approach of [19] is its generality: unlike
other existing approaches, it oﬀers a blackbox construction and proof which
can be used to combine a variety of adaptive and ﬁnality preserving protocols.
However, the design of [19] has an important caveat: the sequence of blocks that
are conﬁrmed in their protocol do not necessarily form a single chain. Indeed,
in the partially synchronous setting, the ﬁnality-guaranteeing conﬁrmation rule
can ﬁnalize blocks on two diﬀerent forks one after the other. The design of [19]
overcomes this apparent issue by constructing a ledger after the blocks have been
ﬁnalized, and “sanitizing” it at a later step.
The sanitization step implies that not all transactions in a conﬁrmed block
may be part of the ledger: for example, if it is a double spend relative to a
transaction occurring earlier in the ledger, such transaction will be removed.
Put diﬀerently, the validity of a particular transaction in a particular block is
decided only once the block is conﬁrmed, and not when the block is proposed.
Most practical blockchain systems are designed with coupled validation, i.e., an
honest block proposer can ensure that blocks contain only valid transactions.
Our approach maintains coupled validity of blockchains and does not have this
shortcoming, as highlighted in Section §1.
3 Security Model
Environment. A blockchain protocol Π is directed by an environmentZ(1κ),
where κ is the security parameter, i.e., the length of the hash function output.
This environment (i) initiates a set of participating nodes N ; (ii) manages a
public-key infrastructure (PKI) and assigns each node with a unique crypto-
graphic identity; (iii) manages nodes through an adversary A which corrupts a
subset of nodes before the protocol execution starts; (iv) manages all accesses of
each node from/to the environment including broadcasting and receiving mes-
sages.
Network model. The nodes’ individual timers do not need to be synchronized
or almost synchronized. We only require they have the same speed. In our net-
work, we have a variety of messages, including blocks, votes, etc. The following
message delay bounds apply to all messages. Secondly, all messages sent by hon-
est nodes are broadcast messages. Thirdly, all honest nodes re-broadcast any
message they have heard. The adversary does not suﬀer any message delay. In
general, we assume that the adversary controls the order of delivery of messages,
but the end-to-end network delay between any two honest nodes is subject to
some further constraints that are speciﬁed below. We operate under either one
of the two settings speciﬁed below:
– M1 (Partial synchrony model): A global stabilization time, GST, is cho-
sen by the adversary, unknown to the honest nodes and also to the protocol
designer. Before GST, the adversary can delay messages arbitrarily. After
GST, all messages sent between honest nodes are delivered within ∆ time.
Blockchain CAP Theorem Allows User-Dependent Adaptivity and Finality 11
Moreover, messages sent by honest nodes before GST are also delivered by
GST + ∆.
– M2 (Synchrony model): All messages sent from one honest node to an-
other are delivered within ∆ time.
Participation model. We introduce the notion of sized/unsized number of
nodes to capture the notion that node network activity (online or oﬄine) varies
over time. It is important to note that we allow for adversarial nodes to go oﬄine
as well. A node can come online and go oﬄine at any time during the protocol.
An online honest node always executes the protocol faithfully. An oﬄine node, be
it honest or adversarial, does not send any messages. Messages that are scheduled
to be delivered during the time when the node is oﬄine are delivered immediately
after the node comes online again. We consider two diﬀerent scenarios:
– U1 (Sized setting): All nodes stay online at all times.
– U2 (Unsized setting): Nodes can come online and oﬄine at arbitrary
times, at the discretion of the adversary, provided a certain minimal number
of nodes stay online.
Abstract protocol model. We describe here our protocol in the abstract
framework that was developed in [16]. In this framework, a blockchain protocol
is speciﬁed as a tuple Π = (I,O,C ), where I denotes the instruction set , O is
an oracle that abstracts out the leader election process, and C is a conﬁrmation
rule (e.g., the k-deep conﬁrmation rule). The bounds on adversarial ratios are
also speciﬁed through O. The rationale for adopting this framework is to point
out precisely how we circumvent the CAP theorem for blockchains, which is the
main result of [16].
The theorem states that no protocol Π = (I,O,C ) can simultaneously of-
fer both ﬁnality (safety in the partially synchronous setting) and adaptivity
(liveness in the unsized setting). Our checkpointed longest chain protocol is a
4-tuple ΠCLC = (I,O,C 1,C 2), with two conﬁrmation rules C1 and C2. This
entire protocol can be split at a node level into two protocols: Πﬁn = (I,O,C 1)
and Πada = (I,O,C 2). The protocol Πﬁn guarantees (deterministic) safety and
(probabilistic) liveness under network assumption M1 and participation level
U1, just as many BFT-type consensus protocols do. It therefore guarantees ﬁ-
nality.Πada guarantees safety and liveness under network assumption M2 and
participation level U2, just as longest chain protocols do. It thereby guarantees
adaptivity. Finally, both Πﬁn and Πada are safe and live under conditions M2
andU1; moreover, the set of blocks conﬁrmed by Πﬁn at any time is a subset of
those conﬁrmed by Πada. A similar property is proven in [19].
Each node can choose one of the two conﬁrmation rules according to their
demands and assumptions. We specify the exact speciﬁcations of I,O,C 1 and
C2 and the associated security properties in the next section.
4 Protocol Description
Nodes in the protocol.In our protocol, letN denote the set of all participating
nodes. Among these, there are two subsets of participating nodesN1 andN2. We
12 S. Sankagiri et al.
call nodes inN1 miners, whose role is to propose new blocks. We call nodes inN2
checkpointers, whose role is to vote for blocks on the blockchains they currently
hold and mark them as checkpoints. Note that we allow for any relation among
these sets, including the possibility that all nodes play both roles ( N1 =N2 =
N ), or the two kinds of nodes are disjoint (N1∩N 2 =φ). The instruction set I
and the oracleO is diﬀerent for miners and checkpointers, and is speciﬁed below.
Note that in the sized/unsized setting, both N1 andN2 are sized/unsized.
Before we specify the protocol, we introduce some terminology pertaining to
checkpoints. A checkpoint certiﬁcate is a set of votes from at least 2 /3 of the
checkpointers for a certain block, that certiﬁes that the block is a checkpoint.
When an honest node receives both a checkpoint certiﬁcate and a chain that
contains the block being checkpointed, we say that the honest node has heard
of a checkpoint. We say that a checkpoint appears at time t if the t is the ﬁrst
time that an honest node hears of it.
I for all nodes. Every honest node holds a single blockchain at all times, which
may be updated upon receiving new messages. They all follow the checkpointed
longest chain rule, which states that a node selects the longest chain that extends
the last checkpointed block it has heard of so far. Ties are broken by the adversary.
To elaborate, a node keeps track of the last checkpoint it has heard of so far.
If a node receives a longer chain that includes the last checkpoint, it adopts
the received new chain. A node ignores all chains which do not contain the last
checkpoint block as per their knowledge.
I,O for miners. An honest miner adopts the tip of its checkpointed longest
chain as the parent block. The miner forms a new block with a digest of the
parent block and all transactions in its buﬀer, and broadcasts it when it is
chosen as a leader by the oracle. The oracle O chooses miners as leaders at
random intervals, that can be modeled as a Poisson process with rate λ. This
joint leader election process can be further split into two independent Poisson
processes. Let the fraction of online adversarial miners be β <1/2. The honest
blocks arrive as a Poisson process of rate (1 −β)λ, while the adversarial blocks
arrive as an independent Poisson process of rate βλ.
I,O for checkpointers. The checkpointers run a multi-iteration Byzantine
Agreement (BA) protocol ΠBA to checkpoint blocks, with each iteration check-
pointing one block. Our protocol is a slight variant of the Algorand BA protocol
from [6]. The complete protocol is described in Appendix A with a minor mod-
iﬁcation from Algorand, which is highlighted in red. This modiﬁcation is made
so as to enable a consistency check across iterations without losing liveness (i.e.,
to get a multi-iteration BA from a single iteration one).
Brieﬂy, the protocol works as follows. Each iteration is split into periods.
Each period has a unique leader chosen by the oracle. Nominally, the values on
which consensus is to be achieved amongst all checkpointers are the blockchains
held by the checkpointers. In practice, the values may be the hashes of the
last block of the blockchain. A key diﬀerence from the Algorand protocol is
that we allow the checkpointers to change their values at the beginning of each
period. The checkpointers aim to achieve consensus amongst these values. The
Blockchain CAP Theorem Allows User-Dependent Adaptivity and Finality 13
ﬁnal chain that has been agreed upon is broadcast to all honest nodes (not
just checkpointers) together with a certiﬁcate. The block that is exactly k-deep
in this chain is chosen as the checkpoint block in current iteration. Here, k is
a parameter of the protocol ΠCLC, and is chosen to be Θ(κ). We call it the
checkpoint depth parameter.
Conﬁrmation rules We propose the following two conﬁrmation rules forΠCLC,
which have diﬀerent security guarantees under diﬀerent assumptions. Either rule
can be adopted by any node in the protocol
– C1: Conﬁrm the chain up to the last known checkpoint.
– C2: Conﬁrm all but the last k′ blocks in the checkpointed longest chain, i.e.,
in the chain that is currently held, where k′ =Θ(κ)
Note that every honest node may choose any value of k′ that they wish.
Intuition behind the checkpointing protocol The checkpointing protocol
is designed such that under optimistic conditions, a checkpoint is achieved within
one period. These optimistic conditions are that the leader of a period is honest,
the network is synchronous, and all chains held by honest checkpointers satisfy
the common preﬁx property. The sequence of leaders for this protocol is guaran-
teed to be chosen in an i.i.d. fashion amongst online checkpointers by the oracle
O. We assume that the fraction of adversarial checkpointers is β′ < 1/3. Thus,
the probability of selecting an adversarial leader at any round is < 1/3.
We now state some key properties of the checkpointing protocol. These prop-
erties, CP0, CP1, CP2, CP3 were introduced in §1 and are elaborated upon
below.
– CP0: Safety. All honest nodes checkpoint the same block in one iteration of
the checkpointing protocol, even during network partition. This checkpoint
lies on the same chain as all previous checkpoints. This is a safety property
of the checkpointing protocol, which will be essential in guaranteeing the
safety of Πﬁn.
– CP1: Recency condition. If a new block is checkpointed at some time t
by an honest node for the ﬁrst time, it must have been in a chain held by
an honest node at some time t′≥t−d. Here, d is the recency parameter of
the protocol, and is of the order O(√κ∆).
– CP2: Gap in checkpoints. If a new block is checkpointed at some timet by
an honest node for the ﬁrst time, then the next iteration of the checkpointing
protocol (to decide the next checkpoint) will begin at time t +e. Here, e is
the inter-checkpoint interval and is chosen such that e≫d.
– CP3: Conditional liveness. If all honest nodes hold chains that are self-
consistent (they satisfy k-common preﬁx property), during an iteration of
the checkpointing protocol, then the checkpointing protocol ﬁnishes within
O(∆) time. Thus, in a period where all honest nodes hold chains that are
self-consistent, checkpoints appear within e +O(∆) time of each other.
14 S. Sankagiri et al.
In Appendix B, we prove that the checkpointing protocol we use (modiﬁed
Algorand BA) satisﬁes these properties. As such, any protocol that satisﬁesCP0
- CP3 can be used in our design.
5 Main Result
To state the main security result of our protocol, recall the notations set in §3.
The complete protocol is denoted by ΠCLC = (I,O,C 1,C 2) and its two user-
dependent variations are Πﬁn = (I,O,C 1) and Πada = (I,O,C 2). We also recall
the notation M1 , M2 for the partially synchronous and synchronous network
model, and U1, U2 for the sized and unsized participation models. Clearly, M1
is a more general setting than M2 and U2 is a more general setting than U1. In
Theorem 1, a result stated for a general setting also applies to the more restricted
setting, but not vice-versa. We ﬁrst deﬁne the notion of safety and liveness that
we use for our protocols.
Deﬁnition 1 (Safety). A blockchain protocol Π is safe if the set of blocks
conﬁrmed during the execution is a non-decreasing set. Put diﬀerently, Π is safe
if a block once conﬁrmed by the conﬁrmation rule remains conﬁrmed for all time
thereafter.
Deﬁnition 2 (Liveness). A blockchain protocol Π is live if there exists con-
stants c,c′ > 0 s.t. the number of new honest blocks conﬁrmed in any interval
[r,s ] is at least ⌊c(s−r)−c′⌋.
We now state our main theorem, concerning the safety and liveness of Πﬁn
and Πada.
Theorem 1. Assume the fraction of adversarial mining power among total hon-
est mining power is bounded by β < 1/2. Further, assume the fraction of ad-
versarial checkpointers is always less than 1/3. Then, the protocol ΠCLC has
the following security guarantees for an execution that runs for a duration of
Tmax =O(poly(κ)) time, where κ is the security parameter, :
– Security of Πﬁn: The protocol Πﬁn is safe, and is live after O(GST +κ)
time in the setting ( M1, U1), except with probability negligible in κ.
– Security of Πada: The protocolΠada is safe and live in the setting (M2, U2),
except with probability negligible in κ.
– Nested Protocols: At any time t, the set of blocks conﬁrmed by Πada is a
superset of the set of blocks conﬁrmed by Πﬁn in all settings.
We provide a proof sketch for Theorem 1 below. A detailed proof is relegated
to Appendices B and C.
Blockchain CAP Theorem Allows User-Dependent Adaptivity and Finality 15
Fig. 3. Flowchart for proving the security property of Πﬁn under setting (M1, U1)
Fig. 4. Flowchart for proving the security property of Πada under setting (M2, U2)
Fig. 5. Flowchart for proving the nesting property of Πﬁn and Πada
16 S. Sankagiri et al.
Proof sketch Our proof for Theorem 1 can be split into two parts. First,
Appendix B, we show that our checkpointing protocol ΠBA satisﬁes the four
checkpointing properties given in §4, namely CP0, CP1, CP2, CP3 . Then,
in Appendix C, we show that our complete protocol ΠCLC satisﬁes the desired
security properties if it uses any sub-protocol for checkpointing that satisﬁes
the above properties. We ﬁrst highlight some aspects of Theorem 1 that are
straightforward to deduce, assuming that ΠBA does satisfy the aforementioned
properties.
Firstly, the safety of Πﬁn under setting (M1, U1) can be deduced from two
facts: 1) ( CP0) safety of ΠBA holds under setting (M1 , U1), and 2) ( P1) the
checkpointed longest chain rule respects all previous checkpoints (see Fig. 3).
Specially, CP0 of ΠBA ensure that all checkpoints are uniquely decided by
all honest nodes and they lie on a single chain by P1, while the checkpointed
longest chain protocol instructs honest nodes to always adopt the longest chain
with the last checkpoint block. Therefore, an honest node will always keep every
checkpoint block it has seen forever.
Secondly, the security of Πada under setting (M2, U2) are deduced by two
facts: 1) security of pure longest chain rule; 2) ( P3) the checkpointing protocol
respects the k-deep rule (see Fig. 4). P3 ensures that every checkpoint must be
at least k-deep in the chain of some honest node when it is decided by ΠBA,
while a block that is k-deep should remain in the longest chain of all honest
nodes forever with high probability under synchrony [9,20,23]. Therefore, every
checkpoint will already be present in all honest nodes’ chains when it appears.
Thus, the chains held by the nodes of the protocol are indistinguishable from the
case where they are following the pure longest chain protocol. Given that the
conﬁrmation rule is also the same for both protocols (k-deep rule),Πada inherits
the safety and liveness properties of the pure longest chain protocol.
Thirdly, the nesting property of the conﬁrmed blocks also follow immediately
by design, given that any checkpointed block must have been already k-deep in
a node’s chain (P3) and the checkpointed longest chain is deﬁned as the longest
chain that contains the latest checkpoint ( P2), (see Fig. 5).
It remains to prove the liveness guarantee of Πﬁn under setting (M1, U1). In
Appendix B, we evaluate the safety and liveness of our checkpointing protocol
ΠBA – a modiﬁed version of Algorand BA. We show that it satisﬁes the desired
checkpointing properties listed in §1. A distinguishing property of ΠBA is the
recency condition ( CP1). This property states that ΠBA only outputs check-
points that are recently contained in some honest node’s chain. Without this
property, the adversary could make all honest nodes waste a long time mining
on a chain that will never be checkpointed.
In Appendix C, we prove an important result of Πada under partial syn-
chronous model: the safety and liveness property will hold after O(GST) time.
This is essential to guarantee the liveness of Πﬁn as a block can be only check-
pointed when it lies in the k-common preﬁx of the checkpointed longest chains
of all honest nodes. Finally, combining all these results (see Fig. 3), we show
Blockchain CAP Theorem Allows User-Dependent Adaptivity and Finality 17
that Πﬁn is live after O(GST) time with high probability, Thereby completing
the proof of the main theorem.
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we presented the design of a new ﬁnality gadget, to be used with
Proof-of-Work blockchains. The proposed gadget provides each user a choice
between an adaptivity guaranteeing conﬁrmation rule and a ﬁnality guarantee-
ing one. This paper underscores the fact that it is possible to circumvent the
impossibility result suggested by the CAP theorem by appropriately combining
the longest-chain protocol with a committee-based BFT protocol. However, this
paper is only a ﬁrst step towards designing a viable protocol. Several interesting
directions of research remain open, which we highlight below.
In our protocol, we used Algorand BA as our checkpointing protocol since
it satisﬁes properties CP0-CP3. Other natural candidates, such as PBFT [4],
Hotstuﬀ [25] and Streamlet [5] do not satisfy these properties. In particular, they
do not satisfy the recency condition CP1 (we elaborate on this in Appendix D).
It would be interesting to see whether these conditions are necessary, or merely
required for the proof. In the latter case, many more BFT protocols could be
used for checkpointing.
We have shown that our protocol is essentially a ﬁnality gadget, just as
Afgjort [10], GRANDPA [24] and Gasper [3]. Through Figure 2, it we have shown
how some of these protocols could be tweaked to enhance their functionality to
the level of the protocol we have designed. Formally analyzing the security of
GRANDPA, and tweaking Gasper to make it secure (with a formal proof) are
interesting open problems that could be tackled using the tools of this paper.
Finality gadgets/checkpointing could potentially oﬀer many more proper-
ties. For example, they could protect against a dishonest mining majority, as
shown in [15]. They could potentially also be used to have lower latency, and
even responsive conﬁrmation of blocks. Designing a protocol that achieves these
properties in addition to the ones we show is an exciting design problem. De-
signing an incentive-compatible ﬁnality gadget also remains an open problem.
Finally, a system implementation of such protocols could lead to newer consid-
erations, such as communication complexity, latency, which would pave the way
for future research.
7 Acknowledgements
This research is supported in part by a gift from IOHK Inc., an Army Research
Oﬃce grant W911NF1810332 and by the National Science Foundation under
grants CCF 17-05007 and CCF 19-00636.
References
1. Bagaria, V., Kannan, S., Tse, D., F anti, G., and Viswanath, P. Prism: De-
constructing the blockchain to approach physical limits. In Proceedings of the 2019
18 S. Sankagiri et al.
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (2019),
pp. 585–602.
2. Buterin, V., and Griffith, V. Casper the friendly ﬁnality gadget.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.09437 (2017).
3. Buterin, V., Hernandez, D., Kamphefner, T., Pham, K., Qiao, Z., Ryan,
D., Sin, J., W ang, Y., and Zhang, Y. X. Combining ghost and casper. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.03052 (2020).
4. Castro, M., and Liskov, B. Practical byzantine fault tolerance. In Proceedings
of the Third Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (USA,
1999), OSDI ’99, USENIX Association, p. 173–186.
5. Chan, B. Y., and Shi, E. Streamlet: Textbook streamlined blockchains. IACR
Cryptol. ePrint Arch. 2020 (2020), 88.
6. Chen, J., Gorbunov, S., Micali, S., and Vlachos, G. Algorand agreement:
Super fast and partition resilient byzantine agreement.IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch.
(2018).
7. Chen, J., and Micali, S. Algorand. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.01341 (2016).
8. Daian, P., Pass, R., and Shi, E. Snow white: Robustly reconﬁgurable consensus
and applications to provably secure proof of stake. In International Conference on
Financial Cryptography and Data Security (2019), Springer, pp. 23–41.
9. Dembo, A., Kannan, S., Tas, E. N., Tse, D., Viswanath, P., W ang, X., and
Zeitouni, O. Everything is a race and nakamoto always wins. to appear in CCS
2020, arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.10484 (2020).
10. Dinsdale-Young, T., Magri, B., Matt, C., Nielsen, J. B., and Tschudi,
D. Afgjort: A partially synchronous ﬁnality layer for blockchains. In Security and
Cryptography for Networks (SCN) (2020).
11. Fitzi, M., Gazi, P., Kiayias, A., and Russell, A. Parallel chains: Improving
throughput and latency of blockchain protocols via parallel composition. IACR
Cryptol. ePrint Arch. 2018 (2018), 1119.
12. Garay, J., Kiayias, A., and Leonardos, N. The bitcoin backbone protocol:
Analysis and applications. In Annual International Conference on the Theory and
Applications of Cryptographic Techniques (2015), Springer, pp. 281–310.
13. Gilbert, S., and Lynch, N. Brewer’s conjecture and the feasibility of consistent,
available, partition-tolerant web services. Acm Sigact News 33 , 2 (2002), 51–59.
14. Gilbert, S., and Lynch, N. Perspectives on the cap theorem. Computer 45 , 2
(2012), 30–36.
15. Karakostas, D., and Kiayias, A. Securing proof-of-work ledgers via checkpoint-
ing. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2020/173, 2020. https://eprint.iacr.
org/2020/173.
16. Lewis-Pye, A., and Roughgarden, T. Resource pools and the cap theorem.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10698 (2020).
17. Malkhi, D., Nayak, K., and Ren, L. Flexible byzantine fault tolerance. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security (2019), pp. 1041–1053.
18. Nakamoto, S. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Tech. rep.
19. Neu, J., Tas, E. N., and Tse, D. Ebb-and-ﬂow protocols: A resolution of the
availability-ﬁnality dilemma. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.04987 (2020).
20. Pass, R., Seeman, L., and Shelat, A. Analysis of the blockchain protocol in
asynchronous networks. In Annual International Conference on the Theory and
Applications of Cryptographic Techniques (2017), Springer, pp. 643–673.
21. Pass, R., and Shi, E. Hybrid consensus: Eﬃcient consensus in the permissionless
model. In 31st International Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC) (2017).
Blockchain CAP Theorem Allows User-Dependent Adaptivity and Finality 19
22. Pass, R., and Shi, E. The sleepy model of consensus. In International Conference
on the Theory and Application of Cryptology and Information Security (2017),
Springer, pp. 380–409.
23. Ren, L. Analysis of nakamoto consensus. IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch. (2019).
24. Stewart, A., and Kokoris-Kogias, E. Grandpa: a byzantine ﬁnality gadget.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.01560 (2020).
25. Yin, M., Malkhi, D., Reiter, M. K., Gueta, G. G., and Abraham, I. Hotstuﬀ:
Bft consensus with linearity and responsiveness. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM
Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (2019), pp. 347–356.
Appendix
A Algorand BA is a Checkpointing Protocol
We outline the full Algorand Byzantine Agreement (BA) protocol below for
completeness. A minor modiﬁcation (marked in red), adding validation, is the
only addition to the original protocol. Honest checkpointers run a multi-iteration
BA to commit checkpoints. The goal of the i-th iteration is to achieve consensus
on the i-th checkpoint. Each iteration is divided into multiple periods and view
changes will happen across periods.
All checkpointers start period 1 of iteration 1 at the same time (time 0).
Checkpointer i starts period 1 of iteration n after it receives 2 t + 1 cert-votes
for some value v for the same period p of iteration n− 1 and waits for another
ﬁxed time e, and only if it has not yet started an iteration n′ >n . Checkpointer
i starts period p≥ 2 of iteration n after it receives 2t + 1 next-votes for some
valuev for period p− 1 of iteration n, and only if it has not yet started a period
p′ > p for the same iteration n, or some iteration n′ > n. For any iteration
n, checkpointer i sets its starting value for period p≥ 2, stp
i , to v (the value
for which 2t + 1 next-votes were received and based on which the new period
was started). For p = 1, st1
i =⊥. The moment checkpointer i starts period p
of iteration n, he ﬁnishes all previous periods and iterations and resets a local
timer clocki to 0. At the beginning of every period, every honest checkpointer i
sets vi to be the checkpointed longest chain in its view at that time.
Each period has a unique leader known to all checkpointers. The leader is
assigned in an i.i.d. fashion by the permitter oracle O. Each checkpointeri keeps
a timer clocki which it resets to 0 every time it starts a new period. As long as
i remains in the same period, clocki keeps counting. Recall that we assume the
checkpointers’ individual timers have the same speed. In each period, an honest
checkpointer executes the following instructions step by step.
Step 1: [Value Proposal by leader] The leader of the period does the
following when clocki = 0; the rest do nothing. If ( p = 1) OR (( p≥ 2) AND
(the leader has received 2t + 1 next-votes for⊥ for period p− 1 of iteration n)),
then it proposes its valuevi. Else if ((p≥ 2) AND (the leader has received 2t+ 1
next-votes for some value v⁄=⊥ for period p− 1 of iteration n)), then the leader
proposes v.
20 S. Sankagiri et al.
Step 2: [The Filtering Step] Checkpointer i does the following when
clocki = 2∆. If(p = 1) OR ((p≥ 2) AND (i has received 2t + 1 next-votes for
⊥ for period p− 1 of iteration n)), then i soft-votes the valuev proposed by the
leader of current period if (it hears of it) AND (the value is VALID OR i has
received 2t + 1 next-votes for v for period p− 1). Else if ((p≥ 2) AND (i has
received 2t + 1 next-votes for some value v⁄=⊥ for period p− 1 of iteration n)),
then i soft-votesv.
Step 3: [The Certifying Step] Checkpointer i does the following when
clocki∈ (2∆, 4∆). If i sees 2t + 1 soft-votes for some value v⁄=⊥, then i cert-
votesv.
Step 4: [The Period’s First Finishing Step] Checkpointer i does the
following when clocki = 4∆. If i has certiﬁed some value v for period p, he
next-votesv. Else if ( (p≥ 2) AND (i has seen 2t + 1 next-votes for⊥ for period
p− 1 of iteration n)), he next-votes⊥. Else he next-votes his starting value stp
i .
Step 5: [The Period’s Second Finishing Step] Checkpointeri does the
following whenclocki∈ (4∆,∞) until he is able to ﬁnish period p. Ifi sees 2t+1
soft-votes for some value v⁄=⊥ for period p, then i next-votes v. If ((p≥ 2)
AND (i sees 2t + 1 next-votes for⊥ for period p− 1) AND (i has not certiﬁed
in period p)), then i next-votes⊥.
Halting condition: Checkpointer i HALTS current iteration if he sees 2t + 1
cert-votes for some value v for the same period p, and sets v to be his output.
Those cert-votes form a certiﬁcate for v. The block that is exactly k-deep in v
is chosen as the checkpoint in current iteration.
A proposed value v (with block B being exactly k-deep in it) from period p
of iteration n is VALID for checkpointer i (in the same period and iteration) if:
– Valuev is proposed by the leader of that period;
– Block B is a descendant of all previously checkpointed blocks with smaller
iteration number;
– BlockB is contained in the checkpointed longest chain that the checkpointer
i holds when entering period p.
The only modiﬁcation to the protocol is in Step 2, in the ﬁrst condition, where
the notion of validity is introduced. This is the only place where new proposals
are considered. The validity notion helps transform the Algorand BA protocol
into the multi-iteration checkpointing protocol that we desire. In Appendix B,
we show that this protocol indeed satisﬁes properties CP0-CP3, as mentioned
in §4.
B Checkpointing Properties
In this section, we prove several important properties of our modiﬁed Algo-
rand BA protocol. We assume throughout that the number of adversarial check-
pointers is strictly less than one-third the total number of checkpointers; this is
necessary to achieve any security results for a partially synchronous consensus
protocol such as Algorand BA.
Blockchain CAP Theorem Allows User-Dependent Adaptivity and Finality 21
– It is safe even under asynchronous network conditions(CP0, proved in Lemma
1). Moreover, it remains deadlock free, in the sense that it can always proceed
as long as messages will be delivered eventually (Lemma 2).
– It is live after GST if the local checkpointed longest chains of all honest nodes
satisfy common preﬁx property ( CP3, proved in Lemma 3).
– It only outputs recently inputted values after GST (CP1, proved in Lemma
4).
We ﬁrst deﬁne some useful notations according to the BA protocol described
in Appendix A.
Deﬁnition 3 (Potential starting value for period p). A value v that has
been next-voted by t + 1 honest nodes for period p− 1.
Deﬁnition 4 (Committed value for period p). A value v that has been
cert-voted by 2t + 1 nodes for period p.
Deﬁnition 5 (Potentially committed value for period p). A value v that
has been cert-voted by t + 1 honest nodes for period p.
Although we slightly altered Algorand BA protocol (which is highlighted in
red in Appendix A), we note that our modiﬁcation does not break the safety
of the protocol or cause any deadlock in Lemma 1 and Lemma 2. At a high
level, the validity check only causes less soft-votes from honest nodes, which is
indistinguishable with the case where the leader is malicious and no value receives
at least 2t + 1 soft-votes in some period. Therefore, the safety and deadlock-free
property remain.
Lemma 1 (Asynchronous Safety, CP0). Even when the network is parti-
tioned, the protocol ensures safety of the system so that no two honest nodes will
ﬁnish one iteration of the protocol with diﬀerent outputs.
Proof. The following properties hold even during a network partition.
– By quorum intersection, as each honest node only soft-votes one value, then
at most one value is committed or potentially committed for each period p
in one iteration.
– If a value v is potentially committed for period p, then only v can receive
2t + 1 next-votes for period p. Thus, the unique potential starting value for
period p + 1 is v.
– If a period p has a unique potential starting value v⁄=⊥, then only v can
be committed for period p. Moreover, honest nodes will only next-vote v
for period p, so the unique potential starting value for period p + 1 is also
v. Inductively, any future periods p′ > p can only have v as a potential
starting value. Thus, once a value is potentially committed, it becomes the
unique value that can be committed or potentially committed for any future
period, and no two honest nodes will ﬁnish this iteration of the protocol with
diﬀerent outputs.
22 S. Sankagiri et al.
Lemma 2 (Asynchronous Deadlock-freedom). As long as messages will be
delivered eventually, an honest node can always leave period p, either by entering
a higher period or meeting the halting condition for the current iteration.
Proof. We ﬁrst prove that there can never exist 2t+1 next-votes for two diﬀerent
non-⊥ values from the same period p by induction.
Start with p = 1. Note that every honest node sets st1
i =⊥ and at most one
value (say v) could receive more than 2 t + 1 soft-votes. Therefore only value v
and⊥ could potentially receive more than 2 t + 1 next-votes in period 1. Note
that it is possible that both v and⊥ receive more than 2t + 1 next-votes: all the
honest nodes could next-vote for⊥ in Step 4 and then next-vote for v in Step 5
after seeing the 2t + 1 soft-votes for v.
Assume that the claim holds for period p−1 (p≥ 2): there exist at most two
values each of which has 2t + 1 next-votes for period p− 1, and one of them is
necessarily⊥. Then there are three possible cases:
– Case 1: Only ⊥ has 2t + 1 next-votes for period p− 1. This is the same as
the induction basis p = 1.
– Case 2: Only v has 2t + 1 next-votes for period p− 1. Then in period p,
every honest node will have starting value stp
i = v, so only v could receive
soft-vote and next-vote.
– Case 3: Both⊥ andv have 2t + 1 next-votes for periodp− 1. Suppose a new
valuev′⁄=v receives 2t + 1 next-votes for period p, then v′ must have 2t + 1
soft-votes for period p and at least t + 1 soft-votes are from honest nodes,
which means that at least t + 1 honest nodes have received 2t + 1 next-votes
for⊥ for period p− 1 when they enter Step 2. Hence when they enter Step
4, they will next-vote v′ or⊥ instead of v. And they will not next-vote v in
Step 5 either. Then v can have at most t next-votes from honest nodes and
at most 2t next-votes from all nodes for period p.
Therefore, we proved the claim for period p. Then we prove the lemma. Note
that a node will stuck in period p if and only if no value receives at least 2 t + 1
next-votes for period p. Then by the previous claim we proved, there are only
two possible cases:
– Case 1:⊥ has 2t+1 next-votes for period p−1. If no value has at least 2t+1
soft-votes for period p, then every honest node will just next-vote ⊥ in Step
4 or Step 5 (since 2t+1 next-votes on⊥ for periodp−1 will eventually reach
every honest node). Otherwise if some value v has at least 2t + 1 soft-votes
for period p, then every honest node will next-vote v.
– Case 2: Only some value v has 2t + 1 next-votes for period p− 1. Then in
period p, every honest node will have starting value stp
i =v, so only v could
receive soft-vote and next-vote. And every honest node will next-vote v in
Step 4.
Blockchain CAP Theorem Allows User-Dependent Adaptivity and Finality 23
The original Algorand BA guarantees fast recovery from network partition:
after GST, an agreement is reached in O(∆) time. However, our protocol does
not have such a strong liveness property as honest nodes may disagree on what
is the longest chain for some time right after GST. Here in Lemma 3, we prove
that our protocol is live and each iteration takes O(∆) time to ﬁnish once the
common preﬁx property of all honest nodes’ longest chains is recovered, which
may take O(GST) time as we will see in §C.
Lemma 3 (Conditional Liveness After GST, CP3). Suppose after time T ,
all honest nodes always have the same values, i.e., their local checkpointed longest
chains satisfy common preﬁx property, then after max{GST,T}, each iteration
of Algorand BA will ﬁnish within O(∆) time. Moreover, all honest nodes ﬁnish
the same iteration within time ∆ apart.
Proof. Let N be the largest iteration number such that some honest node has
committed some value v before GST. Then all honest nodes will receive the
certiﬁcate for v within time ∆ after GST and they will all enter iteration N + 1
after some time. If such N does not exist, i.e., no value has been committed by
any honest node before GST, then we set N = 0.
Further, let p be the highest period that some honest node is working on in
iterationN +1 right before GST is. Then after time∆, all honest nodes will also
start period p as they receive 2t+ 1 next-votes for periodp−1. Soon after, some
valuev (which may be⊥) will receive at least 2t + 1 for period p by Lemma 2,
and all honest node will all start period p + 1 within time ∆ apart.
Once all honest nodes start the same period p within time ∆ apart, the
network partition seems to have never happened. Without partition, if all honest
nodes have the same value, i.e., after max{GST,T}, the following facts hold:
– By Lemma 2, there exist at most two values each of which has 2 t + 1 next-
votes for every period, and one of them is necessarily⊥ if there exist exactly
two.
– If a period p is reached and the leader is honest, then all honest nodes ﬁnish
the current iteration in periodp by their own time 6∆, with the same output
v⁄=⊥. Moreover, all honest nodes ﬁnish within time∆ apart. Indeed, if there
exists a potentially committed value v for period p− 1, then v will be the
unique potential starting value for period p. In period p, the honest leader
proposes v in Step 1 and all honest nodes soft-vote v in Step 2. In Step 3,
by their own time 4∆, all honest nodes have cert-voted v. Thus all of them
ﬁnish the current iteration by their own time 6 ∆, with output v. Otherwise
if there is no potentially committed value in period p− 1, then the leader of
period p may propose its private input v′ or a value v⁄=⊥ for which it has
seen 2t + 1 next-votes from period p− 1. In the ﬁrst case, all honest nodes
will soft-vote v′ in Step 2 as they all see 2t + 1 next-votes for⊥ from period
p− 1; in the second case, all honest nodes will soft-vote v in Step 2 either by
condition 1 or condition 2. In both cases, all honest nodes will cert-vote the
same value in Step 3 by their own time 4 ∆ and ﬁnish the current iteration
with that value by their own time 6∆.
24 S. Sankagiri et al.
– If a period p is reached and there is no committed value for period p (which
only happens if the leader is malicious), then all honest nodes move to period
p + 1 by their own time 8∆, and they move within time ∆ apart. Note that
the honest nodes may start period p not at the same time but within time
∆ apart. Indeed, if no honest node has cert-voted in Step 3, then all honest
nodes next-vote a common starting value v in Step 4 if no one has seen
2t + 1 next-votes for ⊥ for period p− 1, or else all honest nodes next-vote
⊥ in Step 4 or Step 5. In both cases, they all see these next-votes and move
to period p + 1 by their own time 8∆. If at least one honest node has cert-
voted a valuev in Step 3, then v must have received 2t + 1 soft-votes and no
other value could have these many soft-votes by quorum intersection. Thus
only v could have received cert-votes. Since those honest nodes have helped
rebroadcasting the soft-votes for v by their own time 4 ∆, all honest nodes
see 2t + 1 soft-votes forv by their own time 6∆. Thus all honest nodes next-
vote v either in Step 4 or Step 5 by their own time 6 ∆, and all see 2 t + 1
next-votes for the same value by their own time 8∆. Note that some honest
nodes may have next-voted for⊥ in Step 4 as well, thus there may also exist
2t + 1 next-votes for⊥.
– Combining the above facts together, since the leader in each period is honest
with probability> 2/3, one iteration takes in expectation at most 1.5 periods
and at most 10∆ time. Moreover, all honest nodes ﬁnish within time∆ apart.
The liveness property showed in Lemma 3 conditions on the assumption that
all honest nodes will have the same values after some time T . However, this
assumption may not hold right after GST as the adversary could have a bank
of private blocks that can be used to break the common preﬁx property. During
this stage, Algorand BA may still output some values in favor of the adversary
(eg., the adversary sends its favorite chain to all honest nodes). But if the output
value is too old in the sense that no honest node has that checkpointed block
in its local longest chain for a long time, then all honest blocks mined during
this time interval could be potentially wasted as they are not extending the last
checkpoint. However, we show that Algorand BA with our cautious modiﬁcation
won’t let this happen in the following lemma.
Lemma 4 (Recency Condition After GST, CP1). After GST, if one honest
node commits a value v in one iteration at time t, then v must have been the
input value held by at least one honest node at time no earlier than t− 8D∆,
whereD∼ Geo(p) with p> 2/3 being the fraction of honest nodes.
Proof. For a ﬁxed iteration, We deﬁne Vp to be the set of potential starting
values for period p. ThenV1 ={⊥} and also by Lemma 2, we have 1≤|Vp|≤ 2,
and⊥∈Vp if|Vp| = 2 for all p. Note that Vp ={v,⊥} is an bad set as v may be
an outdated value. Then we show that the state won’t remain in {v,⊥} for the
same v for a long time.
Suppose the leader of period p is honest and no honest node has value v for
period p, then we have the following two cases.
Blockchain CAP Theorem Allows User-Dependent Adaptivity and Finality 25
– Case 1: if the leader of period p has received 2t + 1 next-votes for ⊥ for
period p− 1 at the beginning of Step 1, then it will propose v′⁄=v. Further
no honest node will soft-vote or next-vote v. Therefore, the state of period
p + 1 will be{⊥},{v′}, or{v′,⊥}.
– Case 2: if the leader of period p has received 2t + 1 next-votes only for v for
period p− 1 at the beginning of Step 1, then it will propose v. Further every
honest node will soft-vote v in Step 2 either by condition 1 or condition 2.
Therefore, v will be committed in period p.
Therefore, after GST, the state won’t remain in {v,⊥} for the same v from
period p to period p + 1, if the leader of period p is honest and no honest node
has valuev for periodp. By Lemma 3, we know that after GST each period (even
with a malicious leader) will ﬁnish in 8 ∆ time. Combining these facts together,
we can conclude the lemma.
We say the i-th checkpoints committed at some time t by an honest node
after GST is Di-recent if it has been held at depth exactly k in the chain of
an honest node at some time t′≥ t−Di. Then by Lemma 4, we have Di is
stochastically dominated by 8 D∆, where D ∼ Geo(p) with p > 2/3. Let us
deﬁne event E to be the event that all checkpoints committed after GST and
beforeTmax ared-recent, whered is called the recency parameter of the protocol.
Then we have the following corollary directly from Lemma 4.
Corollary 1. There exists d =O(√κ∆) such that P(E)≥ 1−e−Ω(√κ), where
κ is the security parameter.
Proof. Recall that there can be at most Tmax/e checkpoints by CP2. By the
union bound, we have
P(Ec)≤
∑
i
P(Di >d )≤ Tmax
e P(Geo(p)> d
8∆) = Tmax
e (1−p)
d
8∆ =e−Ω(√κ).
Thus we conclude that the modiﬁed Algorand BA, given in Appendix A,
provides the desired checkpointing properties CP0-CP3.
C Checkpointed Longest Chain Properties
C.1 Comparison With Longest Chain Protocol
The security properties of the longest chain protocol has been intensely stud-
ied in recent years. The strong security properties have been demonstrated in
increasing sophistication (both network models as well as tightness of security
threshold): the pioneering work of [12] on the round by round network model has
been extended to discrete and ﬁnely partitioned network model in [20] and to a
26 S. Sankagiri et al.
continuous time network model in [23]. The tightness of the security threshold
has been improved to the best possible in [9]. Despite this wealth of techni-
cal background, the checkpointed longest chain protocol has seemingly subtle
diﬀerences with the vanilla longest chain protocol, but impact the analysis sig-
niﬁcantly. We discuss two of these issues next.
Synchrony versus Partial Synchrony . The security analyses of the longest
chain protocol require that synchronous network conditions hold from the be-
ginning of the protocol [9, 12, 20]. In the partially synchronous model, where
messages may be arbitrarily delayed until some unknown time GST, the proto-
col’s security breaks down. More precisely, even after (a bounded time beyond)
GST, safety and liveness may fail. We describe a possible attack scenario in Fig-
ure 6. The aforementioned works do not provide any security guarantees in the
.
.
.
adversary’s private chain
longest honestchain
at GSTat GST + C1
at C2*GST
at GST at GST + C1 at C2*GST
forked honestchainspriortoGST
Fig. 6. An illustration of the private attack by an adversary in a partially synchronous
system. The private chain is longer than the longest honest chain for a short while after
GST, but not indeﬁnitely after.
partially synchronous model. However, the method of analysis suggests that it is
possible to provide some security guaranteesafterO(GST) time. This should hold
for any adversarial power β in which the protocol is secure in the synchronous
regime. Consider the feasibility of a private attack, in which the adversary must
mine a longer chain than that mined by the honest nodes. The adversary has
some initial advantage immediately after GST by means of some private blocks
(see Figure 6), but it will eventually lose out to the honest chain as the latter’s
Blockchain CAP Theorem Allows User-Dependent Adaptivity and Finality 27
growth rate is strictly larger. The analysis of [9] suggests that the private at-
tack is the worst-case attack. To the best of our knowledge, only [19] analyzes
a longest chain protocol (the sleepy consensus protocol of [22]) in the partially
synchronous setting, and they show desirable properties hold afterO(GST) time,
with the constant being approximately 1/(1− 2β).
Non-Monotonic Chain Growth . The checkpointed longest chain protocol
can behave very diﬀerently compared to the classical longest chain protocol when
checkpoints appear. In the classical version, the chain length of each honest node
grows monotonically. In contrast, in our protocol, the chain held by an honest
node may reduce in length once it hears of a new checkpoint. This could happen
if its current chain does not contain the new checkpoint. This has important
ramiﬁcations for security. A key property used in analyzing the classical proto-
col is that (after GST), two honest blocks that appear more than ∆ time apart
must be at diﬀerent heights (see e.g., [23]). This property needn’t hold for the
checkpointed longest chain protocol; in fact, it can be violated if the adversary
chooses to do so. In eﬀect, this causes a bleeding (or wastage) of honest mining
power. An instance of this is illustrated in Figure 7. The analysis of [19] uses
many properties of longest chain protocols ‘oﬀ the shelf’ from [22]. However, for
reasons highlighted above, we must establish new properties that hold determin-
istically for our protocol, irrespective of the adversary’s actions. These properties
are weaker analogs of those satisﬁed by the longest chain protocol. This is to be
expected, since the checkpointed longest chain protocol may behave just as the
longest chain protocol irrespective of GST, if the adversary so wishes.
C.2 Deﬁnitions
We ﬁrst deﬁne the notion of common preﬁx and chain quality, which are now
standard in the literature (see, e.g., [12]).
Deﬁnition 6 (k-Common Preﬁx). For a chain C, let C⌊k denote the new
chai nobtained by dropping the last k blocks fromC. We say that the k-common
preﬁx property holds if for any two chains C1,C2 held by honest nodes at times
t1≤t2 respectively, it holds that C1⌊k≼C 2.
Deﬁnition 7 ( (k,s )-Chain Quality). We say that the (k,s )-chain quality prop-
erty holds if for all honestly held chains C, every portion of C with k consecutive
blocks mined after time s contains at least one honest block.
Comparing to [12], our deﬁnition of k-common preﬁx is identical to theirs.
Our deﬁnition of (k,s )-Chain Quality with s = 0 is identical to their deﬁnition
of chain quality with parameterµ = 1/k. We introduce the extra parameters to
emphasize that the chain quality property holds only for the portion of the chain
consisting of blocks mined after time s =O(GST). In the partially synchronous
model, we cannot hope to do better. In [12], the authors show that common
preﬁx is identical to safety (also called persistence) and chain quality is identical
28 S. Sankagiri et al.
honest blocks mined 
between time (t-d, t) 
honest 
blocks 
mined 
after 
time t
checkpoint that 
appears at time t
longest chain containing 
latest checkpoint
Fig. 7. An illustration of a reduction in chain length due to the appearance of a check-
point. Consequently, two honest blocks may be at the same height, even if they are
mined more than ∆ time apart.
Blockchain CAP Theorem Allows User-Dependent Adaptivity and Finality 29
to liveness for thek-deep conﬁrmation rule. Thus, to prove security ofΠada after
O(GST), it suﬃces to show that k-common preﬁx and (k,s )-chain quality hold
after time O(GST), for s =O(GST).
C.3 Proof Sketch
In this section, we analyze the security of the protocol by discretizing time into
slots. Note that this is purely a proof strategy; we do not change any assump-
tions about the behavior of the nodes, nor of the message timings. Our proof
is structured similar to that in [12]. It has three major parts that we describe
below.
– First, we deﬁne the notion of a typical execution (Deﬁnition 8). A typical
execution is one in which the number of mined honest and adversarial blocks
over a suﬃciently large period do not deviate from their mean by a large
fraction. We introduce the notion of a convergence opportunity here, simi-
lar to [20]. We show that a typical execution occurs with high probability
(Corollary 2).
– Next, we show necessary conditions for common-preﬁx violation and chain
quality violation in terms of the mining process. These conditions are anal-
ogous to the condition in the classical longest chain protocol, which are
roughly as follows: the number of adversarial blocks over an interval is more
than the number of honest blocks over the same interval.
– Third, we show that these necessary conditions won’t happen afterO(GST+
κ) time in a typical execution (Lemma 10). Hence, with high probability, the
common preﬁx property and the chain quality property of the checkpointed
longest chain will hold after O(GST +κ) time (Corollary 3).
The ﬁrst part is similar to existing works. Our main novelty lies is the second
and third parts. As hinted above, we can at best hope to obtain weaker necessary
conditions for common preﬁx violation and chain quality violation than those for
the classical protocol. At the same time, a condition that is too weak may not
be rare in a typical execution. We show that the necessary conditions are very
similar for both k-common preﬁx violation and ( k,s )-chain quality violation.
Moreover, we show that these conditions are impossible in a typical execution
after O(GST + κ) time. Our analysis relies heavily on the properties of the
checkpointing protocol proved in §B. For clarity, we further split this part of the
proof into four steps.
– We reduce all common-preﬁx violation instances to a special case where two
diverging chains are held by honest nodes at the same slot.
– We establish a lower bound on the lengths of honestly held chains in terms
of convergence opportunities in an interval, with some slack to account for
the possibility of bleeding.
– We establish the desired necessary condition for k-common preﬁx violation
by analyzing the common portion and the forked portion of the two diverging
honestly held chains.
30 S. Sankagiri et al.
– We establish the desired necessary condition for (k,s )-chain quality violation
by comparing the chain growth for honest chains in an interval with the
number of adversarial blocks in the same interval.
In this section, whenever we refer to a block B being k-deep in a chain C, we
mean there are k or more blocks that are descendants of B inC.
C.4 Typical Execution
From §4, we know that the block mining process is a Poisson process with rate
λ. This can be further split into an adversarial block mining process of rate βλ
and an independent honest block mining process of rate (1 −β)λ, with β <
1/2. Therefore the number of honest/adversarial blocks mined in any interval
is a Poisson random variable. By the Chernoﬀ bound, we know that a Poisson
random variable is tightly concentrated around its mean. However, we would
like to obtain such a result for all intervals of length bigger than O(κ). Hence,
for the sake of applying the union bound, we discretize time into slots: the ith
slot is the time interval (( i− 1)∆,i∆ ]. The total number of slots in the entire
execution of the system is tmax =⌈Tmax/∆⌉ = O(poly(κ)). We abuse notation
to let GST denote the ﬁrst slot that begins after the global synchronization time.
All our analysis henceforth will be in the form of slots, but the protocol remains
a continuous time one as described in §4.
We deﬁne the following random variables for slot i.
– Yi = 1 if there is exactly one block that is mined by honest nodes in slot i
and there is no block that is mined by honest nodes in slot i− 1 and i + 1,
otherwise 0. We follow the notation in [20] to call such slots as a convergence
opportunity (such a block is also called loner in [23]).
– Zi is the number of adversarial blocks plus the number of honest blocks that
are not a convergence opportunity, in slot i.
Let
¯y ≜E[Yi] = (1−β)λ∆ e−3(1−β)λ∆.
Further,E[Yi +Zi] =λ∆, and hence
¯z ≜E[Zi] =λ∆− ¯y.
For anyt1≤t2, we deﬁne Y [t1,t 2] = ∑t2
i=t1+1Yi andZ[t1,t 2] = ∑t2
i=t1+1Zi.
With some abuse of notation, we let Y [S] denote ∑
i∈SYi for any set of slots
S⊂N. As we are now in discrete time, the notation [ t1,t 2] denotes the set of
slots{t1,...,t 2}. We have that
EY [t1,t 2] = ¯y(t2−t1), EZ[t1,t 2] = ¯z(t2−t1).
We note that for any β <1/2 and any ∆, there exists ε> 0 and λ> 0 s.t.
¯y(1− 3ε)> ¯z.
Blockchain CAP Theorem Allows User-Dependent Adaptivity and Finality 31
In particular, this implies ¯y >¯z, and (1−ε)¯y >¯z +ε¯y. We shall operate under
this regime. We also assume that λ∆ <1. This condition implies ¯y = Ω(λ∆),
where the constants hidden by Ω(λ∆) do not depend on β,λ,∆ .
With these notations in place, we can now deﬁne the notion of a typical
execution.
Deﬁnition 8 (Typical execution). An execution is (ε,τ )-typical for a β-
corrupt system, for ε∈ (0, 1) and τ ∈ N, if the following events hold for any
t1,t 2 s.t. t2−t1≥τ:
|Y [t1,t 2]−EY [t1,t 2]|≤ εEY [t1,t 2];
|Z[t1,t 2]−EZ[t1,t 2]|≤ εEY [t1,t 2];
|Y [t1,t 2] +Z[t1,t 2]− (EY [t1,t 2] +EZ[t1,t 2])|≤ ε(EY [t1,t 2] +EZ[t1,t 2]).
Proposition 1. For any t1≤ t2, the following events hold with probability at
least 1−e−Ω(ε2λ∆|t2−t1|):
|Y [t1,t 2]−EY [t1,t 2]|≤ εEY [t1,t 2];
|Z[t1,t 2]−EZ[t1,t 2]|≤ εEY [t1,t 2];
|(Y [t1,t 2] +Z[t1,t 2])− (EY [t1,t 2] +EZ[t1,t 2])|≤ ε(EY [t1,t 2] +EZ[t1,t 2]).
Proof. The Chernoﬀ bound for a binomial or a Poisson random variable X gives
us
P(|X−EX|≥ δEX)≤ 2e−δ2EX/3
We ﬁrst prove the concentration bound onY [t1,t 2]. We cannot directly apply
standard concentration inequalities on Y [t1,t 2] since Yi’s are not independent
random variables. However, for any i, Yi and Yi+3 are independent. Each Yi is
Bernoulli(¯y). Hence,Y [t1,t 2] can be written as the sum of three binomial random
variables.
Y [t1,t 2] =
∑
i
Yt1+3i +
∑
i
Yt1+3i+1 +
∑
i
Yt1+3i+2.
Using the Chernoﬀ bound and the union bound, we get that each of these three
binomial random variables are within a factor ofε/3 from their mean, except with
probability with probability e−Ω(ε2λ∆(t2−t1)). When this happens, the desired
bound on Y [t1,t 2] follows.
Next, we note that Y [t1,t 2] +Z[t1,t 2] is a Poisson random variable. Using
the Chernoﬀ bound for Poisson random variables, and the fact thatE(Y [t1,t 2]+
Z[t1,t 2]) = λ∆(t2−t1), we obtain that Y [t1,t 2] +Z[t1,t 2] is within a factor of
ε from its mean except with probability e−Ω(ε2λ∆(t2−t1)).
It remains to bound Z[t1,t 2]. For this, we need a slightly tighter bound on
Y [t1,t 2] and Y [t1,t 2] +Z[t1,t 2] than the one in the statement of the proposi-
tion; we replace ε by ε/3. Both these bounds also hold except with probability
e−Ω(ε2λ∆(t2−t1)). From these bounds, and the relation ¯y >¯z, we can the desired
bound on Z[t1,t 2].
32 S. Sankagiri et al.
There are at most t2
max choices of t1,t 2. The following corollary follows from
Proposition 1 and the union bound.
Corollary 2. The protocol executes with (ε,τ )-typical execution with probability
at least 1−e−Ω(ε2κ).
Proof. From Proposition 1 and the union bound, we get that the probability of
a typical execution is at least 1−t2
maxe−Ω(ε2λ∆τ). We can chooseτ large enough
such that λ∆τ = Θ(κ). We know that tmax = poly(κ). From this, the stated
result follows.
C.5 Necessary Conditions for Common Preﬁx/Chain Quality
Violation
We begin by noting some basic properties of the checkpointing protocol, and also
introduce some new notation that is useful for this subsection. Our ﬁrst result is
a chain growth lemma (Lemma 6). The chain growth lemma highlights the extent
of bleeding that can take place in the checkpointing protocol. Next, we focus on
the common preﬁx property. We show that without loss of generality, we can
assume that common-preﬁx violation occurs between two chains at the same slot
(Lemma 7). Following this, we show that in the forked portion, the number of
adversarial blocks over the forked portion must be at least half the total number
of blocks. This gives us the desired necessary condition comparing the number of
convergence opportunities and adversarial blocks over a suﬃciently large period
(Lemma 8). Finally, we analyze the chain quality property in Lemma 9.
Basic properties of checkpoints Let us recall some properties of the check-
pointing algorithm, re-stated in terms of slots instead of discrete time.
1. We say that a checkpoint appears in slot t if the ﬁrst time an honest node
marks the checkpoint is in slot t. If a checkpoint appears at slot t, all honest
nodes mark the checkpoint by the beginning of slot t + 2.
2. Let d′ ≜⌈d/∆⌉. Any checkpoint that appears at slot t >GST +d′ was at
leastk-deep in a chain held by an honest node in some slott′∈{t−d′,...t }.
3. Let e′ =⌊e/∆⌋. If two consecutive checkpoints appear at slots t,t′, then
t′≥t +e′.
Let GST +d′ < t∗
1 ≤ t∗
2 ≤ ... be the sequence of slots at which check-
points appear after slot GST +d′. Let the corresponding checkpoint blocks be
B∗
1,B∗
2,... . Let t∗
0 ≜ GST. Deﬁne Sl ≜{t∗
l + 2,...,t ∗
l+1−d′− 2} for all l≥ 0
and let S ≜∪l≥0Sl. We refer to each Sl as an inter-checkpoint interval.
Chain growth results
Lemma 5 (Chain Length Lower Bound). Let t1,t 2 be two slots such that
t1∈ S and and t2≥ t1 + 2. LetC be a chain held by some honest node in slot
t1. Then all honest nodes will hold a chain of length at least |C| in slot t2.
Blockchain CAP Theorem Allows User-Dependent Adaptivity and Finality 33
Proof. Let h be an honest node that holds chain C in slot t1, and let h′ be an
arbitrary honest node (possibly h) that holds a chainC′ in slot t2. Since t1∈S,
we know that t∈ Sl for some l. Therefore B∗
l is the last checkpoint that is
marked inC. Clearly, all honest nodes will hear of C by the beginning of slot t2,
and would also have markedB∗
l as a checkpoint. We aim to show that|C′|≥|C| .
There are now two cases to consider.
– Node h′ has not marked any new checkpoint at the time it holds C′. In this
case, it will hold a chain at least as long as C, as it is a chain that it has
heard of that contains all the checkpoints that it has marked.
– Node h′ has marked at least one new checkpoint at the time it holds C′. In
particular, it has marked B∗
l+1. Note that B∗
l+1 must be exactly k-deep in
some honestly held chain C∗ at some slot in the interval [ t∗
l+1−d′,t∗
l+1] in
which B∗
l+1 was not marked as a checkpoint. By the ﬁrst case, C∗ must be
at least as long asC, since t1≤t∗
l+1−d′− 2. Further, all honest nodes must
hold a chain at least as long as C∗ at the time of marking B∗
l+1. Arguing
inductively, we see that all honest nodes that have marked at least one new
checkpoint compared toC also hold a chain at least as long as C.
Lemma 6 (Chain Growth). Consider a chain C held by an honest node in a
slott≥ GST + 1. SupposeC contains an honest block B mined in slot s at height
𝓁. Then|C|≥ 𝓁 +Y [S∩ [s + 2,t− 2]].
Proof. From Lemma 5, we can deduce three useful facts. Firstly, the ﬁrst con-
verge opportunity block inS∩[s+2,t−2] will be built at a height≥𝓁+1, since
all honest nodes by that slot would have adopted a chain at least as long as 𝓁.
Secondly, we see that all convergence opportunities in S are mined at distinct
heights. This is because all convergence opportunities are spaced at least 2 slots
apart. Thirdly, all honest nodes will adopt a chain that is at least as long as the
chain mined by the last converge opportunity inS∩[s+2,t−2]. Together, these
two statements prove the desired statement when s∈S.
To prove the same result when s⁄∈S, we consider the following two cases:
– Suppose s /∈ S, and s≥ GST. This implies s∈{ t∗
l−d′− 1,...t ∗
l + 1} for
some l≥ 1. then in slot t∗
l + 2 all honest nodes will see both block B and
checkpointBl. Moreover, block B and checkpoint Bl are on the same chain
C∗, hence all honest nodes should hold a chain of length at least 𝓁 in slot
t∗
l + 2, simply because C∗ contains B. The rest of the proof is identical to
the case s∈S.
– Supposes /∈S ands< GST. LetB be the set of checkpoints with appearance
time <= GST, i.e, for a block B∗∈B , at least one honest node marks B∗
before GST. Then in slot GST + 1, all honest nodes will see a chain C∗ that
contains block B and all checkpoints in B. Hence all honest nodes should
hold a chain of length at least 𝓁 in slot GST + 1, simply becauseC∗ contains
B. The rest of the proof is identical to the case s∈S.
34 S. Sankagiri et al.
Analysis of Common Preﬁx Property Let us ﬁrst note a simple fact about
the checkpointed longest chain rule. In what follows, we say a chain C was held
by an honest node in slot t if it was held by the node at any time in the interval
((t− 1)∆,t∆ ].
Proposition 2. If a block B is k-deep in a chain C held by an honest node h
in slot t, then it either remains k-deep inC′ or is not present in C′, whereC′ is
an chain held by h in slot t′.
The above statement is trivially true for the longest chain rule, since the chain
length held by an honest node is monotonically increasing. It is not so immediate
for the checkpointed longest chain rule, since the length of the chain held by a
particular honest node may reduce upon adopting a new checkpoint block. A
crucial point in the proof of this statement is the property that a checkpoint is
alwaysk-deep in all honest nodes’ chains. The statement is illustrated in Figure
C.5, and is proven below.
Proof. As remarked above, the property holds trivially as long as the honest
node h adopts successive chains of increasing length. Consider the case when at
some slot t′≥ t, h adopts a new checkpoint block and truncates its chain in
the process. Suppose block B is present in both C andC′. Then it must be an
ancestor of the new checkpoint block. Since the new checkpoint block is at least
k-deep in the new chain, so is block B.
blocks≥𝑘
𝐵"
𝐵)
checkpoint block
𝐶
𝐶′
Fig. 8. Illustration of Lemma 2. Both B1, B2 are k-deep in C. B1 gets ousted in C′,
while B2 remains k-deep.
Lemma 7 (Common Preﬁx Reduction). Suppose the common preﬁx prop-
erty is violated after slot t0, i.e., there exist slots t1 and t2: t0≤t1≤t2, honest
nodesh1,h 2 (possibly the same), and chains C1,C2, s.t.C1 is held by h1 at slot
t1,C2 is held by h2 at slot t2, butC1⌊kC2. Then the following event happens
Blockchain CAP Theorem Allows User-Dependent Adaptivity and Finality 35
at some slot t∈ [t1,t 2]: there exists chainC andC′ such thatC′⌊kC while both
C′ andC are held by honest nodes in slot t.
We refer to this events as common preﬁx violation at slot t, and the pair of
chainsC′ andC as a certiﬁcate of the violation . Lemma 7, stated for the check-
pointed longest chain rule, is also true for the longest chain rule. The proofs are
identical as well, given that the statement of Lemma 2 holds for both protocols.
We provide the proof for completeness.
Proof. Lett≥t1 be the earliest slot at which there exists some chain C held by
an honest node h (possibly h1) s.t.C1⌊kC. Let B be the block that is exactly
k-deep inC1; clearly, it is not present in C. We now claim that there must be a
chainC′ held by nodeh1 at some time in slot t that containsB. Note thatC and
C′ satisfy the relation C′⌊kC, thus proving the desired statement. It remains
to show the claim.
Suppose h1 never holds a chain containing B in slot t. Then it must have
adopted a chain that does not contain B in an earlier slot. However, we have
deﬁned t to be the earliest slot such that some chain held by an honest node
does not contains B. Thus, we have shown the claim to be true. A technical
point to note is that if an honest node adopts a new chain Cnew at time s in slot
t, it must have held the older chain Cold at some time (s−ϵ) in slot t itself.
blocks≥𝑘
𝐵
𝐶
𝐶′
𝐶"
𝐶)
Fig. 9. Illustration of Lemma 7. BlockB isk-deep in C1. It remains so in C′. However, it
is absent from C. In this case, C′ and C form a certiﬁcate of k-common preﬁx violation.
Lemma 8 (Necessary condition for common preﬁx violation). Suppose
k-common preﬁx violation occurs at slot t. Then there exist t∗ < t such that
Z[t∗,t ] +Y [t∗,t ]≥k and Z[t∗,t ]≥Y [S∩ [t∗ + 2,t− 2]]− 1.
Proof. The ﬁrst condition Z[t∗,t ] + Y [t∗,t ] ≥ k is trivial, as a certiﬁcate of
k-common preﬁx violation contains at least k blocks. Then we focus on the
36 S. Sankagiri et al.
derivation of the second condition. From Lemma 7, we know that there exists
two honestly held chains C,C′ such that C′⌊k C. Let 𝓁 be the height of the
shorter of the two chains. Consider the last block on the common preﬁx of C,C′
that is a convergence opportunity. Denote it by B, let its height be 𝓁 and let t
be the slot at which it was created. If there is no convergence opportunity in the
common preﬁx, let B be the genesis block and t = 0. From Lemma 6, we know
that 𝓁≥𝓁∗ +Y [S∩ [t∗ + 2,t− 2]], which implies 𝓁−𝓁∗≥Y [S∩ [t∗ + 2,t− 2]].
We now show that Z[t∗,t ]≥𝓁−𝓁∗− 1.
Firstly, we note that any adversarial blocks inC,C′ that are descendants ofB
must be mined in the interval [t∗,t ]. Let ˜B denote the last block on the common
preﬁx ofC,C′, let its height be ˜𝓁. The portion of the common preﬁx from block
B (excluded) to ˜B (included) is composed entirely of adversarial blocks. This
accounts for ˜𝓁−𝓁 adversarial blocks.
We now consider two possibilities regarding the number of checkpoints on the
chainsC,C′. In the ﬁrst case, both chains have the same number of checkpoints
marked. In this case, all checkpoints must be on the common preﬁx of C,C′. In
the second case, one of the chains has one extra checkpoint. This checkpoint
must have appeared in slot t or slot t− 1, for otherwise, it would be adopted by
the other chain too. In both cases, let ˆB denote the last common checkpoint of
the two chains. We now analyze the forked portion of the chains in both cases.
For the ﬁrst case, we show that all convergence opportunity blocks that are
descendants of ˆB must be at distinct heights. Note that every chain ending at
each such convergence opportunity blocks contain all checkpoints that appear
until slott. Thus, at the time when any honest node would have received such a
chain (say ˜C), it would adopt ˜C or a chain of at least| ˜C|. This is because ˜C would
contain all the checkpoints that this node would have marked until then. Since
the miner of every convergence opportunity hears of broadcasts from all previous
convergence opportunities before mining, the claimed result follows. For the
second case, a slightly modiﬁed statement holds: all convergence opportunities
that are descendants of ˆB mined in slots ≤ t− 2 must be at distinct heights.
This can be proven by arguing in the same manner as above. Since the latter is
a weaker claim than the former, we use the latter claim in the general case.
Note that all blocks in the forked portion are descendants of ˜B, and are
therefore descendants of ˆB. Therefore, all convergence opportunity blocks in the
forked portion mined in slots≤t− 2 must be at distinct heights. Since they can
be on at most one of the chains, they must be paired with either an adversarial
block or a convergence opportunity from slot t− 1 or t. There can be at most
one convergence opportunity from slots {t− 1,t}. From this, we conclude that
the number of adversarial blocks in the forked portion is at least 𝓁− ˜𝓁− 1.
In summary, we can say that the number of distinct adversarial blocks in
chainsC,C′ combined that are descendants of blockB∗ is at least𝓁− ˜𝓁−1+ ˜𝓁−𝓁
=𝓁−𝓁−1. All these blocks are mined in slots in the range [t∗,t ]. Thus,Z[t∗,t ]≥
𝓁−𝓁∗− 1. Combined with the inequality 𝓁−𝓁∗≥Y [S∩ [t∗ + 2,t− 2]], we get
the inequality: Z[t∗,t ]≥Y [S∩ [t∗ + 2,t− 2]]− 1.
Blockchain CAP Theorem Allows User-Dependent Adaptivity and Finality 37
Analysis of Chain Quality Property With some abuse of notation, we use
the term (k,s )-chain quality to refer to a slot s instead of some time s.
Proposition 3 (Chain Quality Reduction). Suppose at some slot t, (k,s )-
chain quality is violated, i.e., there exists an honestly held chain C in slot t that
contains k-consecutive blocks mined after slot s and there is no honest block
amongst them. Then at some slot t′∈ (s,t ], there exists a chain C′ held by an
honest node such that the last k blocks ofC′ are all adversarial blocks.
Proof. Suppose, at some slot t, (k,s )-chain quality is violated. Clearly, t > s,
else it is not possible for C to contain blocks mined at slots >s . There are two
cases to consider. First, we consider the case where there are no more honest
blocks inC after the string of k consecutive adversarial blocks. Then the claim
trivially follows with t′ = t,C′ =C. Next, consider the case where there exists
an honest block inC after the string of k consecutive adversarial blocks. Let the
block be B and let its mining time be t′. Since these k blocks are all mined after
slot t0, so is B (i.e., t′ > s). Then the portion of C up to B (but not including
it) was held by the honest miner of block B. Call this sub-chain C′. From the
condition onC, it is immediate that the last k blocks ofC′ are adversarial. Thus
we have our claim.
If there exists an honestly held chain C at slot t such that the last k blocks
ofC are all adversarial blocks mined after slot s, we say that (k,s )-chain quality
violation occurs at slot t. From Proposition 3, we assume without loss of gener-
ality that all violations of ( k,s )-chain quality are such that ( k,s )-chain quality
violation occurs at slot t, for some t>s .
Lemma 9 (Necessary Condition for Chain Quality Violation). Suppose,
for any slot t≥ GST + 1, (k,s )-chain quality is violated at slot t. Then there ∃
t∗ <t s.t. Z[t∗,t ]≥k and Z[t∗,t ]≥Y [S∩ [t∗ + 2,t− 2]].
Proof. LetC be the honestly held chain at slot t for which chain quality is
violated. Let t∗ be the time of mining of the last honest block in C. Let this
block be called B and let its height be 𝓁. By Lemma 6, we have|C|≥ 𝓁 +Y [S∩
[t∗ + 2,t− 2]]. We know that the portion ofC from height𝓁 onward is composed
only of adversarial blocks. These must be mined at or after slot t∗. Therefore,
|C|− 𝓁≤ Z[t∗,t ]. This implies Z[t∗,t ]≥ Y [S∩ [t∗ + 2,t− 2]]. Furthermore, we
know thatZ[t∗,t ]≥k by the condition that the lastk blocks do not contain any
convergence opportunity.
C.6 Probabilistic guarantee
We begin with a proposition that transforms the necessary conditions from Lem-
mas 8 and 9 to a more convenient form for analysis.
Proposition 4. Supposek-common preﬁx violation or (k,s )-chain quality vio-
lation occurs at slot t. Then there exist t∗ < t such that Z[t∗,t ] +Y [t∗,t ]≥ k
and Z[t∗,t ]≥Y [max(GST,t∗) + 2,t− 2]− (1 + (t−t∗)/e′)(d′ + 3)− 1.
38 S. Sankagiri et al.
Proof. By comparing the necessary conditions in Lemma 8 and Lemma 9, it
suﬃces to show that Z[t∗,t ] ≥ Y [S∩ [t∗ + 2,t − 2]]− 1 implies Z[t∗,t ] ≥
Y [max(GST,t∗) + 2,t− 2]− (1 + (t−t∗)/e′)(d′ + 3)− 1. Indeed, Z[t∗,t ] ≥
Y [S∩ [t∗ + 2,t− 2]]− 1 implies
Z[t∗,t ]≥Y [max(GST,t∗) + 2,t− 2]−n(d′ + 3)− 1,
wheren is the number of checkpoints that appear in the interval [t∗,t ]. We now
show a upper bound on n: n≤ (t−t∗)/e′ + 1. Indeed, a block mined in slot t∗
cannot be checkpointed at a slot earlier than t∗. Of course, at slot t, we only see
checkpoints that appear until slot t. No more than⌈(t−t∗)/e′⌉≤ (t−t∗)/e′ + 1
checkpoints can appear over such an interval, as consecutive checkpoints are
separated at least e′ slots apart. Thus, n≤ (t−t∗)/e′ + 1. Therefore, Z[t∗,t ]≥
Y [max(GST,t∗) + 2,t− 2]− (1 + (t−t∗)/e′)(d′ + 3)− 1.
We conclude the proof in this section by showing that the in a typical exe-
cution, the condition of Proposition 4 does not occur after slot t>C · GST for
some appropriate C >0. Therefore k-common preﬁx property and ( k,s )-chain
quality property hold after slot t>C · GST.
Lemma 10. For τ large enough, under ( ε,τ )-typical execution, there exist a
constant C > 0 such that k-common preﬁx property and (k,s )-chain quality
property holds after slot t>s , where k = 2λ∆τ and s =C· GST.
Proof. Suppose k-common preﬁx property or ( k,s )-chain quality property is
violated at slot t > C· GST, then by Lemma 8 we have that there exists r < t
such that
Z[r,t ] +Y [r,t ]≥k, (1)
and
Z[r,t ]≥Y [¯r + 2,t− 2]− (1 + (t−r)/e′)(d′ + 3)− 1, (2)
where ¯r ≜ max(r, GST). We only need to show that this event won’t happen
under typical execution. If t−r < k
2λ∆ = τ, then under typical execution we
have
Y [r,t ] +Z[r,t ]≤Y [r,r +τ] +Z[r,r +τ]≤ (1 +ε)λ∆τ <2λ∆τ =k,
which contradicts Eqn. (1). Hence we have t−r≥ k
2λ∆ =τ.
Further we can rewrite Eqn. (2) as
Z[r,t ]≥Y [¯r + 2,t− 2]− (t−r)d1/e′−d2, (3)
whered1 =d′ + 3 andd2 =d′ + 4. Eqn. (3) describes a random walk with drift.
Note that the extra terms on the right side of Eqn. (3) are small by the fact that
d2 =O(√κ) =O(√τ) and e′ can be chosen arbitrarily large.
As we have seen t−r≥τ, then under typical execution we have
Z[r,t ]≤ (t−r)¯z +ε(t−r)¯y <(1− 3ε)(t−r)¯y +ε(t−r)¯y = (1− 2ε)(t−r)¯y.
Blockchain CAP Theorem Allows User-Dependent Adaptivity and Finality 39
Case 1: r> GST, i.e., ¯r =r. Then we have
Y [r + 2,t− 2]≥ (1−ε)(t−r− 4)¯y.
Therefore, we can always choose e′ to be large enough such that (1 − 2ε +
d1/e′)(t−r)¯y +d2 < (1−ε)(t−r− 4)¯y, given that τ, as well as t−r, is large.
Therefore,Z[r,t ]<Y [¯r + 2,t−2]−(t−r)d1/e′−d2, which contradicts Eqn. (3).
Case 2: r≤ GST, i.e., ¯r = GST. Then we have
Y [¯r + 2,t− 2]≥ (1−ε)(t− GST− 4)¯y >(1−ε)(C− 1
C t− 4)¯y.
Again we can always lete′ andC to be large enough such that (1−2ε+d1/e′)s¯y+
d2 < (1−ε)(C−1
C t− 4)¯y, given that τ, as well as t, is large. Then we have
Y [¯r+2,t−2]>Z [0,t ]+d1t/e′ +d2≥Z[r,t ]+d1(t−r)/e′ +d2, which contradicts
Eqn. (3).
Then we have the following corollary, which states that the common preﬁx
property and the chain quality property of the checkpointed longest chain will
hold after O(GST) time with high probability.
Corollary 3. If we choose k to be large enough such that k =Θ(κ), then there
exist a constantC >0 such thatk-common preﬁx property and (k,C·GST)-chain
quality property hold after slot C· GST with probability at least 1−e−Ω(√κ).
Proof. All the analysis in this section conditions on that event E occurs (CP1
holds), and we have P(E)≥ 1−e−Ω(√κ) by Corollary 1. Then combine it with
Corollary 2 and Lemma 10, and apply the union bound, we can conclude the
proof.
D Discussion
In this section, we elaborate on some of the ﬁner details pertaining to our work.
Choice of Algorand as the Checkpointing BFT Protocol We chose Algo-
rand BA as our checkpointing protocol because it satisﬁes the desired properties
CP0-CP3 as listed in §4. However, some other well-known BFT protocols fail to
meet all these properties, and therefore we don’t use them as a candidate check-
pointing protocol. Generally, BFT protocols can be categorized into two classes:
1) Classic BFT protocols, such as PBFT [4] and Hotstuﬀ [25]; 2) Chained BFT
protocols, such as Streamlet [5] and Chained Hotstuﬀ [25].
PBFT and Hotstuﬀ don’t satisfy the CP1 (the recency condition). The ad-
versary could potentially lock on a blockB privately when it becomes the leader
of one view, and then the adversary ﬁnalizes B as a checkpoint after a long time
when B is no longer in the best chain ( B is a descendant of the last checkpoint
but not in the longest chain). In this attack, all honest blocks mined during this
time period could be potentially wasted as they are not extending B. Further,
this resource-bleeding attack could be turned into a perpetual liveness attack in
40 S. Sankagiri et al.
the partial synchronous model. One simple way to ﬁx this bug is by introduc-
ing randomness into the protocol: when a new honest leader does not hear any
locked block from previous views, it will propose an empty block ⊥ to refresh
the privately locked block, with a certain probability. However, this simple ﬁx
introduces unnecessary latency in the normal path when there is no attack and
the network is synchronous, as it may need more views with honest leaders to
ensure progress.
On the other hand, for Streamlet and Chained Hotstuﬀ, the ﬁnalization of
one block is supported by its descendants, therefore it is hard to design a check-
pointed longest chain protocol such that all ﬁnalized checkpoints lie on a single
blockchain. Therefore, ﬁnding or designing a good checkpointing protocol is non-
trivial, and it would be interesting to see whether there is any other BFT protocol
that ﬁts our need and perhaps has better latency and lower communication cost.
Checkpointing protocol properties The ﬁnality gadget in GRANDPA [24]
and the ﬁnality layer of Afgjort [10] are also checkpointing protocols. The desired
checkpointing properties in GRANDPA are very similar to ours: it has CP0,
CP1 and CP3, but CP2 (gap in checkpoints) is missing. Without CP2, the
mining bleeding could happen frequently, which leads to security vulnerabilities.
(Note that GRANDPA also does not have property P3, as discussed in §2).
Afgjort only requires CP0, but it has two other desired properties: The “∆-
updated” property guarantees that the chains held by honest nodes are at most
∆ blocks beyond the last ﬁnalized block; “k-support property” ensures that any
ﬁnalized block must have been on the chain adopted by at least k honest nodes.
The “∆-updated” property is in the opposite direction of our CP2; our protocol
satisﬁes n/3-support. We defer a full comparison of all these properties and
identifying the minimal set of desired properties to future work.
Attack on GRANDPA In §2, we claimed that in the GRANDPA design, the
k-deep rule is insecure in the synchronous but unsized setting. Here, we describe
a possible “roll-back” attack, using some notations from GRANDPA paper [24].
Let h be the number of online honest voters and we assume f + 1≤ h≤ 2f.
Suppose at the beginning of round 1, the genesis block B0 has two children B1
andB2 (they are siblings), whereB1 is an honest block andB2 is a private block.
Then allh honest voters prevote forB1 in step 3 of round 1. However, all honest
voters will get stuck in step 4 if the adversary doesn’t send any prevotes, because
g(V1,v) = nil and E0,v = B0 hence g(V1,v)≥ E0,v is not satisﬁed. However, all
honest miners will mine on B2 (assuming tie breaking in favor of the adversary).
WhenB2 becomes k-deep, the adversary casts enough prevotes and precommits
on B1 to make B1 ﬁnalized in round 1. Now B2 is deconﬁrmed, and all honest
miners switch to mine onB1, creating a safety violation. Further if the adversary
has mined some private blocks on B1, then he can continuous this attack in all
rounds and all the ﬁnalized block will be adversarial block, leading to a liveness
violation.