The DAG KNIGHT Protocol: A Parameterless Generalization of
Nakamoto Consensus
February 23, 2023
Michael Sutton
msutton@cs.huji.ac.il
Independent Researcher
Yonatan Sompolinsky
ysompolinsky@fas.harvard.edu
Harvard University
ABSTRACT
In 2008 Satoshi wrote the first permissionless consensus protocol,
known as Nakamoto Consensus (NC), and implemented in Bitcoin.
A large body of research was dedicated since to modify and extend
NC, in various aspects: speed, throughput, energy consumption,
computation model, and more [ 4]. One line of work focused on
alleviating the security-speed tradeoff which NC suffers from by
generalizing Satoshi’s blockchain into a directed acyclic graph of
blocks, a block DAG. Indeed, the block creation rate in Bitcoin must
be suppressed in order to ensure that the block interval is much
longer than the worst case latency in the network. In contrast, the
block DAG paradigm allows for arbitrarily high block creation rate
and block sizes, as long as the capacity of nodes and of the net-
work backbone are not exceeded. Still, these protocols, as well as
other permissionless protocols, assume an a priori bound on the
worst case latency, and hardcode a corresponding parameter in
the protocol. Confirmation times then depend on this worst case
bound, even when the network is healthy and messages propagate
very fast. In this work we set out to alleviate this constraint, and
create the first permissionless protocol which contains no a pri-
ori in-protocol bound over latency. KNIGHT is thus responsive to
network conditions, while tolerating a corruption of up to 50% of
the computational power (hashrate) in the network. To circumvent
an impossibility result by Pass and Shi [ 16], we require that the
client specifies locally an upper bound over the maximum adver-
sarial recent latency in the network. KNIGHT is an evolution of
the PHANTOM paradigm [20], which in turn is a parameterized
generalization of NC.
1 INTRODUCTION
The first permissionless consensus protocol, Nakamoto Consensus
(NC), was created in 2008 by Bitcoin’s originator Satoshi Nakamoto
[13]. Permissionless is defined as an environment where the set of
participants is not a priori known and fixed. Since its introduction,
the research community offered many variants that improve upon
NC in terms of speed, throughput, energy consumption, computa-
tion model, and more [4].
One line of work focused on alleviating the speed-security trade-
off, by generalizing Satoshi’s blockchain into a directed acyclic
graph of blocks – a block DAG [11, 19, 20]. Whereas in NC each
block references a single predecessor, and a single chain within
the resulting tree is extended, in DAG-based constructions blocks
reference multiple predecessors. Blocks are thus created much more
frequently than Bitcoin’s 10 minutes interval, typically multiple
blocks per one unit of network delay. This asynchronous operation
mode opens up the possibility of conflicts across blocks created in
parallel. The heart of the consensus protocol is its conflict resolution
rule, which is written in the form of a DAG ordering algorithm—
each node runs locally a procedure that takes as input the block
DAG visible to it and returns a linear ordering over its blocks, and
by implication over its transactions. This ordering ensures and
recovers consistency: The first of any set of conflicting transactions
is accepted, and the rest are ignored and skipped over. As any
consensus protocol, this procedure must satisfy the property that
all nodes eventually agree on the ordering.
KNIGHT is a parameterless DAG-based consensus—the protocol
assumes no upper bound on the network’s latency. In other words,
the ordering procedure of KNIGHT does not take as input parame-
ters representing the network’s assumed latency. To the best of our
knowledge, KNIGHT is the first permissionless parameterless con-
sensus protocol that is secure against any attacker with less than
50% of the computational power in the network. These properties
put KNIGHT at an inherently stronger spot than its counterparts:
It is both faster and more secure, since it makes fewer assumptions
and operates properly despite varying network conditions.
1.1 KNIGHT optimization framework
Conceptually, KNIGHT is an evolution of the PHANTOM opti-
mization framework [20], which in turn is an evolution of NC. In
NC, the longest chain of blocks within the tree is selected and ex-
tended. PHANTOM generalizes the longest chain rule: Rather than
selecting the longest chain, it selects the largest sufficiently con-
nected subset of blocks. The following definition from [20] captures
“well-connectedness”:
Definition 1. Given a DAG𝐺 =(C,𝐸), a subset𝑆⊆C is called a
𝑘-cluster, if∀𝐵∈𝑆 :|𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝐵)∩𝑆|≤𝑘.
Here, the anticone of a block is the set of blocks whose order
with respect to it is not dictated by the DAG topology; see Figure 2.
Formally, PHANTOM solves the following optimization problem:
PHANTOM Optimization: Maximum 𝑘-cluster sub-
DAG (𝑀𝐶𝑆𝑘 )
Input: DAG𝐺 =(C,𝐸),𝑘
Output: A subset𝑆★⊂C of maximum size, s.t.𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝐵)∩
𝑆★≤𝑘 for all𝐵∈𝑆★.
Similarly to other parameterized consensus protocols, the param-
eter k of PHANTOM represents an upper bound on the network’s
latency (technically, on the number of blocks per one unit of delay,
with high probability). Observe that for𝑘 = 0, PHANTOM coincides
with NC, as the longest chain is the largest 0-cluster. Indeed, when
the block interval is large (e.g., Bitcoin’s 10 minutes per block), the
latency parameter𝑘 can be set to 0. In contrast, a system enjoying a
1
Michael Sutton and Yonatan Sompolinsky
(a)𝛼 = 0.05,𝑘 = 2
 (b)𝛼 = 0.25,𝑘 = 4
 (c)𝛼 = 0.45,𝑘 = 7
Figure 1: KNIGHT optimization illustrated. The figures show a fixed honest DAG on the left, alongside an attacker on the right.
The attacker’s byzantine fraction grows from𝛼 = 0.05 in 1a to𝛼 = 0.45 in 1c. The algorithm finds a𝑘-cluster of minimum width
(𝑘+ 1) sufficient to cover at least 50% of the DAG, thereby outweighing the minority attacker.
high block creation rate would require setting𝑘 to be much larger.
For instance, in Kaspa, a cryptocurrency based on PHANTOM, the
block interval was set to 1 second, and 𝑘 was hardcoded with a
value of 18, reflecting an assumption of𝐷≤ 10 seconds; see [2] for
a live visualization of the live DAG of Kaspa.
In contrast, KNIGHT offers an alternative optimization frame-
work, which does not pre-assume a latency bound:
KNIGHT Optimization: Minimal 𝑘 Majority Cluster
sub-DAG (𝑀𝑘𝑀𝐶 )
Input: DAG𝐺 =(C,𝐸)
Output: A subset 𝑆★ = 𝑀𝐶𝑆𝑘(𝐺), s.t. 𝑘 is minimal and
|𝑆★|≥ |𝐶|
2 .
B
g
B
g g
B
Figure 2: The topology of a block-DAG induces a partial or-
dering over blocks. The figure on the left marks blocks prov-
ably created after block 𝐵, which are called its future set.
Similarly, the figure on the middle marks blocks provably
created before 𝐵, its past set. The right-most figure marks
blocks whose ordering with respect to 𝐵 is ambiguous and
must be dictated and agreed by the consensus protocol.
That is, rather than selecting the largest𝑘-cluster for one prede-
termined value of𝑘, we select the largest𝑘-cluster for each value
of𝑘, and pick the minimal𝑘 whose maximizing cluster covers 50%
of the DAG. We thus utilize the honest majority assumption to
recognize a subset of blocks that are sufficient to counter an attack.
In this way, we avoid the need to know𝑘 in advance, and allow the
protocol to self-adjust to the real time latency. The actual KNIGHT
protocol contains more components than the optimization problem
𝑀𝑘𝑀𝐶 , not merely for efficiency but also for security consider-
ations – primarily, natural or malicious changes in the latency 1
– as will be described formally in Section 2. See Figure 1 for an
illustration of KNIGHT’s optimization dynamics.
1.2 Parameterlessness
KNIGHT differs from previous work on proof-of-work-based con-
sensus protocols which typically operate in the synchronous setup
and assume an a priori upper bound over 𝐷, either explicitly or
implicitly. For instance, Bitcoin’s difficulty adjustment algorithm
is targeting a block creation rate of𝜆 = 1/600 blocks per second,
which reflects an underlying assumption that 𝐷≪ 600 seconds.
Similarly, when instantiating the PHANTOM protocol, one must
pre-configure the protocol’s𝑘 parameter which represents the ex-
pected number of blocks created in one unit of delay, reflecting an
assumption that𝐷≪ 𝑘+1
𝜆 .
Parameterlessness has two implications. First, confirmation times
in parameterized protocols are typically limited by their parameter—
they are a function of the hardcoded parameter, regardless of the
network’s actual latency. Thus, even when the actual latency of
blocks in Bitcoin is 1 or 2 seconds (as is the situation for most of
the time, see [1]), the protocol’s convergence times is in the order
of tens of minutes. Similarly, Kaspa’s convergence time remains in
the order of tens of seconds even when its latency is way below 10
seconds.
As a parameterless protocol, KNIGHT avoids this shortcoming
and allows the network to converge according to its actual condi-
tions. Thus, when the network’s adversarial latency is very low, the
ordering of KNIGHT will converge immediately, allowing clients
to confirm transactions within a few Internet RTTs (Round Trip
Times); and when the network is slow and clogged, the ordering
will take longer to converge and transactions longer to confirm.
Crucially, we emphasize that this responsiveness is with respect to
the worst-case adversarial latency; in Subsection 1.4 we distill this
nuance.
Figures 3 and 4 demonstrate this effect. In the former, a DAG of
various “widths” is presented, corresponding to different network
latencies. When the network is speedy, miners are aware of almost
1When the delay is roughly constant, KNIGHT coincides with PHANTOM, and in
particular when the delay is negligible, it coincides with NC.
2
The DAG KNIGHT Protocol: A Parameterless Generalization of Nakamoto Consensus
(a)𝐷 = 2,𝑘 = 4, conf. time = 12
0
12
 (b)𝐷 = 1,𝑘 = 1, conf. time = 6
0
6
 (c)𝐷 = 0.1,𝑘 = 0, conf. time = 1.2
0
1.2
time (seconds)
Figure 3: Confirmation times of KNIGHT under various network conditions. As the latency decreases from 2 seconds per block
message in (3a) to 0.1 seconds in (3c), 𝑘 decreases from 4 to 0, and confirmation times improve from 12 to 1.2 seconds. Observe
that the algorithm correctly recognizes a cluster of minimal width (=𝑘+ 1) which still covers at least 50% of the corresponding
DAGs (𝑘 = 4, 1, 0 in 3a, 3b, 3c, respectively) as required by KNIGHT’s optimization framework. The depicted DAGs are a result
of a simulation of a network mining 𝜆 = 3.75 blocks per second and an (invisible, secret) attacker with 𝛼 = 0.2; the required
confidence parameter was set to 𝜖 = 0.05.
all blocks created by their peers, blocks enjoy small anticones (or
“gaps”) of size 1 at most, and transactions can be confirmed quickly.
On the other extreme, many blocks are created in parallel, blocks
suffer from larger anticones, and transactions take longer to con-
firm. This scenario represents either a slow down in the network,
or a system intentionally parameterized with a high block rate,
e.g.,𝜆 = 10 blocks per second. Figure 4 further compares the effect
of varying network conditions on parameterized protocols (e.g.,
NC, PHANTOM) and parameterless ones (e.g., KNIGHT). The con-
firmation times in the former protocols are constant, accounting
to the hardcoded latency-dependent parameter; worse yet, when
the network suffers an anomaly, and message delays violate the
bound, transactions cannot be confirmed altogether. In contrast,
the confirmation times of parameterless protocols correspond to
the (bound of the client over the maximum) current latency in the
0
Network latency (sec)
0
4
8
12Confirmation time (sec)
Responsive
Not responsive
Figure 4: A qualitative comparison of the confirmation time
behaviour of parameterized protocols and parameterless
ones. Confirmation times in the latter case are fast when
the network is smooth and speedy, whereas in the former
confirmation time is still limited by the constant hardcoded
worst-case bound. Additionally, when the bound of a pa-
rameterized protocol is violated, transactions may not be
confirmed safely, whereas parameterless protocols adapt to
the anomaly and allow confirming transactions more slowly
than usual, yet safely.
network, and, in particular, the network remains fully operational,
yet slow, during periods of network anomaly.
A second implication of parameterlessness is added security:
KNIGHT enjoys a stronger security than existing permissionless
protocols, as network hiccups do not interrupt consensus, because
they do not violate assumptions necessary for its proper operation.
1.3 Partial Synchrony
Traditionally, a consensus protocol is said to be partially synchro-
nous if an upper bound on the network latency exists but is un-
known to the protocol [6]. However, proof-of-work consensus in-
troduces some ambiguity into this classification, as it decouples
the transaction ordering protocol from the finality protocol : The
core of consensus is the transaction ordering rule (e.g., Bitcoin’s
longest chain rule, KNIGHT’s DAG ordering). This is the canonical
algorithm which defines the system, and which all participants run
in the same way, including adversarial nodes—individual interpre-
tations of the ledger which differ from the canonical procedure are
pointless. In contrast, transaction finality (e.g., the confirmation
count in Bitcoin) is a non-binding procedure which each client or
user configures and calculates locally according to their own beliefs
and needs, and bears the consequence. E.g., a Bitcoin user who be-
lieves that malicious miners possess currently less than 33% of the
hashrate will confirm transactions faster than one who believes the
bound to be 49%, and a 34% attacker will harm the former but not
the latter. Another example is SPECTRE, wherein the user needs to
additionally specify her belief on the latency bound via a parameter
which is configured individually, and which is inconsequential –
and, in fact, not-communicated – to the rest of the network.
For these considerations, we believe that a consensus system
whose transaction-ordering rule is agnostic to latency should be
referred to as partially synchronous and parameterless, interchange-
ably, even if transaction-finality depends on a latency bound (con-
figured by the user locally). We leave the question on terminology
for the Distributed Systems academic community to decide on, and
in this paper use the term “parameterless” to describe KNIGHT’s
operation mode.
3
Michael Sutton and Yonatan Sompolinsky
1.4 Responsiveness
In the lack of an a priori latency assumption, confirmation times in
a parameterless consensus system correspond to the real network
latency. However, “real latency” has two profoundly different inter-
pretations: the observable latency in the network, and the worst
case latency that an attacker may cause. Indeed, a capable attacker
may allow – or even assist – the network to operate smoothly, se-
lectively, and disrupt it during a later stage of the attack. A protocol
that has the strong property of confirming transactions according
to the observable latency is called responsive [16].
Despite being parameterless, KNIGHT is not responsive in this
sense of performing tightly with the current observable latency,
rather is responsive in the weaker sense of performing tightly with
the current maximum latency causable by an adversary. Indeed, in
KNIGHT, it is not enough for the client to set a local bound on the
observable latency, rather the bound should reflect the maximum
latency that may be caused by the attacker. That is, even if messages
currently propagate fully within 1 or 2 seconds, if an attacker may
disrupt the network and cause messages to take up to 30 seconds
to go through,𝐷 should be set by the client to 30 seconds.
This limitation of KNIGHT is unavoidable, since no parame-
terless protocol with 50% byzantine tolerance threshold can be
responsive [16]:
Theorem 14 (Responsive protocols cannot tolerate 1/3 corruption)
[Pass and Shi]. No secure permissionless consensus protocol that is
also responsive can tolerate 1/3 or more corruption.
1.5 Consensus protocols, principal categories
Consensus protocols are generally classified and compared accord-
ing to the following aspects:
• What are the assumptions made by the protocol on the un-
derlying network and behaviour of nodes. The stronger the
assumptions the weaker the protocol.
• When its assumptions are preserved, how does it perform,
specifically, how fast is consensus reached.
• When its assumptions are violated, does the protocol recover,
and how fast it recovers. A protocol guaranteed to recover
from past failures is called self-stabilizing [5].
• If the underlying system is used to settle a live queue of trans-
actions, we also ask: How many transactions can the protocol
serve, i.e., what constraint on the transaction throughput
the protocol imposes or its assumptions require.
Through these categories we now survey, with some brevity,
KNIGHT ’s main properties:
1.5.1 Model assumptions. KNIGHT ’s fault model is the byzantine
setup, which allows the attacker to deviate arbitrarily from the pro-
tocol’s rules. We follow the proof-of-work model which assumes a
computationally bounded attacker which possesses less than 50%
of the computational power in the network. This assumption is con-
sidered to be weaker (hence more secure) compared to traditional
permissioned setups which require a priori knowledge of participat-
ing nodes, and compared to proof-of-stake which typically requires
a fixed and identifiable set of nodes at the beginning of each epoch.
The attacker is not assumed to suffer any communication delays
in its incoming or outgoing links, and may further disrupt honest
nodes’ communication by delaying messages between them for up
to𝐷 seconds; however, the𝐷 is not known to the protocol. Con-
versely, the attacker is also capable of speeding up communication
between honest nodes down to no-latency; such manipulations are
specifically relevant to and challenging in the context of KNIGHT.
1.5.2 Confirmation times (asymptotic). The parameterlessess of
the protocol is tightly related to its speed of confirmation: Transac-
tion confirmation times are a function of the actual latency in the
network (Subsection 1.3 contains an important reservation of this
statement in our context).
Confirmation times are commonly discussed in two modes –
optimistic performance and pessimistic performance. The former
accounts to the scenario where all participating nodes behave prop-
erly, and there is no visible attack. In this optimistic scenario,
KNIGHT confirms transactions in O
 ln(1/𝜖)
𝜆 +𝐷

/(1− 2𝛼) +
𝐷2𝜆 seconds, where𝜆 is the block creation rate in units of blocks/sec
(adjusted via a “difficulty adjustment” algorithm adapted from Bit-
coin [13]),𝐷 is an upper bound on the recent delay in the network,
0≤ 𝛼 < 1/2 is the attacker’s size, and 0≤ 𝜖 < 1 is the required
confidence. As in any proof-of-work protocol, the parameters𝛼 and
𝜖 are set by the client. Uniquely to KNIGHT (and to SPECTRE [19]),
the parameter 𝐷 too is set by the client—an underestimation by
the client will lead to her premature acceptance of transactions,
whereas an overestimation will cause her to wait more time than
necessary before confirming.
In the pessimistic scenario, a visible manipulation of the DAG
is ongoing, and confirmation times are significantly slowed down.
Analyzing the convergence time in this case in a tight manner is
intractable, and we are thus left with an exponential bound on con-
firmation times:O

1
𝜆(exp(𝑐·𝐷𝜆/(1− 2𝛼))+ ln(1/𝜖)/( 1− 2𝛼))

seconds. We emphasize, however, that this bound is far from tight,
assumes an unrealistically strong attacker, and furthermore pay-
ments of honest users can still be confirmed in quadratic time as
in the optimistic case. Indeed, as long as the user did not publish a
visible conflict (aka double spend), her transaction is commutative
with other recent transactions in the DAG, hence the receiving
client may confirm it despite the ordering still converging.
1.5.3 Self stabilization. Similarly to NC and other proof-of-work
consensus protocols, KNIGHT is self-stabilizing: If the 50% thresh-
old was violated at some point in the past, KNIGHT recovers and
transactions may be confirmed safely once the conditions are met;
the recovery time is linear in the length of the violation phase. Sim-
ilarly, the latency parameter𝐷 which is set by each client locally
should correspond to the recent delay in the network, and need not
account for the worst case historical latency. Contrast these prop-
erties to proof-of-stake protocols, which rely heavily on finality,
and which fail therefore to recover from historical catastrophes.
1.5.4 Throughput. In contrast to NC, and similar to other DAG-
based consensus protocols, KNIGHT remains secure under arbitrar-
ily high throughput configurations—the block rate, and the block
size, should be constrained only according to the capacity of nodes’
hardware and that of the network’s backbone.
All in all, in this work we propose a novel proof-of-work based
parameterless consensus protocol. As far as we are aware, KNIGHT
4
The DAG KNIGHT Protocol: A Parameterless Generalization of Nakamoto Consensus
is the first proof-of-work protocol to solve consensus under the
parameterless model; the only other protocol to operate under
this model is SPECTRE, which solves a weaker version of the con-
sensus problem (“weak liveness”), and which supports therefore
only the use case of payments where transactions of honest users
are commutative [ 19]. KNIGHT is a parameterless evolution of
PHANTOM—save some nuances, the two coincide when the de-
lay is constant; when the delay is negligible relative to the block
creation rate, the two protocols further coincide with NC.
1.6 Structure of this paper
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
contains the full description of the KNIGHT protocol. Section 3
formalizes the model and the statement of KNIGHT’s properties.
Section 4 discusses confirmation procedure for clients, and confir-
mation times. In Section 5 we present implementation details. We
conclude with surveying related work in Section 6.
2 THE DAG KNIGHT PROTOCOL
2.1 Preliminaries
The following terminology is used extensively throughout this
paper. We follow terminology established by previous works con-
cerning DAG protocols [19, 20].
In a block DAG𝐺 =(C,𝐸),C represents blocks and𝐸 represents
hash references to previous blocks—edges thus point backwards in
time.𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝐵,𝐺) denotes the set of blocks reachable from 𝐵, and
𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝐵,𝐺) the set of blocks from which 𝐵 is reachable; these
blocks were provably created before and after𝐵, correspondingly.
𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝐵,𝐺) denotes the set of blocks outside 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝐵,𝐺) and
𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝐵,𝐺); the time-relation between 𝐵 and blocks in its an-
ticone cannot be derived explicitly from the DAG topology. See
Figure 2. When context is clear, we write𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝐵) instead of
𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝐵,𝐺). We denote by 𝑡𝑖𝑝𝑠(𝐺) the set of blocks with in-
degree 0, that is, which are not referenced by any other block in the
DAG. The system is initialized with some known block𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑠 ; if a
sub-DAG𝐺′⊆𝐺 has only one block with out-degree 0, we denote
it by𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑠(𝐺′).
For convenience, we additionally regard the virtual block of the
DAG,𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙(𝐺), which is a hypothetical (un-mined) block which
points to the DAG’s tips as its parents. Thus,𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙(𝐺)) =𝐺.
Essentially,𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙(𝐺) represent the block template for the next
block to be created by the miner, if it is honest.
2.2 PHANTOM optimization paradigm
The PHANTOM protocol [20] proposed an optimization problem
as a generalization of NC (see box in Section 1). The optimization
targets the largest𝑘-cluster, for a predetermined fixed parameter
𝑘 which is a function of the worst case latency in the network. In
a𝑘-cluster, each block is connected via the DAG topology to all
but at most𝑘 blocks. Since honest nodes possess a majority of the
hashrate, and since blocks created by honest nodes reference one
another, the largest𝑘-cluster contains recent honest blocks with
high probability, which suffices to secure the ordering.
B
virtual        AttackerHonest       
(a)
B
virtual        AttackerHonest       (b)
Figure 5: 5a shows a successful freeloading scheme against
PHANTOM with 𝑘 = 5. The largest 5-cluster contains (also)
attacker blocks which were withheld till now, and excludes
honest blocks which were mined correctly above 𝐵 and
published immediately. 5b demonstrates the failure of this
scheme against KNIGHT. The protocol recognizes that the
largest𝑘-cluster, for𝑘 = 0, suffices to cover a majority of the
DAG, selects this 0-cluster, and excludes the attack blocks.
2.3 KNIGHT optimization paradigm
KNIGHT adds another layer to the optimization problem (as pre-
sented in Section 1). Rather than assuming 𝑘 as an input to the
problem, KNIGHT searches for the minimal𝑘 such that the largest
𝑘-cluster covers at least 50% of the DAG.
This dual minmax optimization (min 𝑘, max𝑘-cluster) allows
us to tolerate just enough latency and disconnectivity among the
selected set of blocks: Intuitively, selecting the cluster of a smaller𝑘
would compromise safety, exposing the ordering to manipulations
by a minority attacker whose blocks do not cover 50% of the graph;
selecting the cluster of a larger𝑘 would compromise liveness, as it
would allow adversary blocks to inject themselves into the order
even after honest blocks have settled.
Building on this parameterless optimization paradigm, we are
able to devise a secure consensus DAG ordering rule that is re-
sponsive to the network’s actual adversarial latency and is not
constrained to a priori hardcoded bounds on the adversarial latency
which require large safety margins and perform suboptimally. We
reiterate, however, that KNIGHT is not responsive in the strong
sense of performing according to the network’s observable latency,
rather according to the maximum latency that an adversary may
cause in the current network; still, under normal Internet condi-
tions, and with sufficient redundancy between peers, this should
be in the order of a few seconds at most. In fact, no protocol that
is secure against corruption of up to 50% of the nodes can achieve
responsiveness in this strong sense, as was proven by Pass and
Shi [16].
5
Michael Sutton and Yonatan Sompolinsky
Figure 5 provides a visual insight into the different behaviour
of PHANTOM vs KNIGHT’s optimization paradigms. It illustrates
a∼ 35% attacker attempting a “freeloading” manipulation on the
respective protocols. Consider the case where PHANTOM was pa-
rameterized with𝑘 = 5, say, and where the honest network enjoys
a period of extreme connectivity in the network such that its blocks
form a chain (a 0-cluster, in PHANTOM terminology). In a freeload-
ing scheme, the attacker builds her blocks with a certain artificial
gap from the rest of the network, 5 in our example. PHANTOM
then considers these blocks as part of the largest 5-cluster, and they
will precede the second half of the honest chain in the final ordering.
KNIGHT, in contrast, is not easily misled—it will recognize that
𝑘 = 0 suffices to cover the majority of the DAG. The same intu-
ition applies generally to any scenario where the network’s current
(adversarial) latency is smaller than the worst case (adversarial)
latency. Moreover, if the network suffers excessive delays due to
some anomaly, and PHANTOM’s latency bound is violated, trans-
actions may not be confirmed. KNIGHT’s operation, in contrast,
will remain intact, albeit inevitably slower.
2.4 Vanilla version
Turning KNIGHT’s optimization paradigm into a DAG ordering
rule seems straightforward:
Algorithm 1 Naïve ordering algorithm
Input: 𝐺 – the DAG to order
Output: Ordering of𝐺
1: function Order-DAG(𝐺)
2: for𝑘 = 0, 1... ∞ do
3: 𝑆←𝑀𝐶𝑆𝑘
4: if|𝑆|≥ |𝐶|
2 then
5: Order𝐺 according to some (deterministic) topologi-
cal sort that gives precedence to𝑆
6: return the ordered DAG
However, Algorithm 1 is secure only in setups with constant
latency and a naïve attacker.2 We will now describe the full ver-
sion of KNIGHT, which is secure against both spontaneous and
malicious changes in network latency.
2.5 Formal specification
We are now ready to present the holy grail of this work, the DAG-
KNIGHT protocol, as specified formally in Algorithm 2. Faithful to
its optimization paradigm, the complex of KNIGHT ’s procedures
(Algorithms 2-6) is designed to recognize the minimal𝑘 for which
there exists a𝑘-cluster that covers a majority of the DAG. Yet, the
choice of cluster entails more than merely finding a large enough
cluster, and produces a rather involved algorithm; these complexi-
ties will be explained and justified in Subsection 2.6. But first let us
provide a bird’s-eye view of the algorithm.
2.5.1 Overview. The algorithm receives as input a blockDAG𝐺,
and outputs a selected tip of 𝐺 and an ordering over its blocks,
following these steps:
2Additionally, line 3 involves solving an NP-hard problem [20].
• Compute the orderings of each tip on its past, and its selected
parent, recursively. (Alg. 2)
• Recognize iteratively the next conflict point between the
remaining tipsP, namely, their latest common chain ances-
tor𝑔. The induced hierarchy implies that disagreements, or
chain-splits, are dealt with from early to recent. (Alg. 2)
• For each conflict point𝑔, decide between competing sets of
tips𝑃𝑖’s (which agree with one another on this conflict) by
computing each set’s rank (see below), removing the losers
from the set of tips; if needed, run a tie-breaking procedure
(Alg. 4).
This elimination process terminates when a single tip re-
mains (|P| = 1) following the resolution of the most recent
conflict point, which is then returned as 𝐺’s selected tip.
(Alg. 2)
• The winning set is that for which at least one representative3
achieves the lowest rank among all representatives of all sets.
(Alg. 3)
• The rank of a block, per a given conflict context, is the mini-
mal𝑘 for which the𝑘-cluster returned by the algorithm has
a subset which uniformly covers at least 50% of the DAG.
(Alg. 3)
• The𝑘-cluster returned by the algorithm is computed recur-
sively, similarly to the GHOSTDAG cluster-selection (aka
colouring) procedure. A subtle condition, represented by the
boolean flag 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑒 _𝑠𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑐ℎ , further dictates whether the re-
cursion is called for all parents of the block or only for those
which agree with it (on this conflict).4 (Alg. 5)
• A set of blocks – a subset of the returned cluster – uniformly
covers 50% of G if for each block in the set, at least 50% of
its future belongs to the set (minus at most 𝑔(𝑘) ∈𝑜(𝑘)).
Checking for the existence of a subset which satisfies this
property can be done efficiently, by traversing the DAG topo-
logically from tips to genesis, computing each block’s “vote”
between -1 and 1 (minus 1 represents a block that either does
not belong to the original cluster, or violates the coverage
condition), and returning genesis’ vote.5 (Alg. 6)
2.5.2 Formal specification. We proceed to present the main proce-
dure of KNIGHT, Algorithm 2, and its subprocedures (Algorithms 3-
6). We begin with some formal definitions that the algorithms make
use of.
Definition 2. For a block 𝐵, chain-parent(𝐵) is a unique parent of
𝐵, set by KNIGHT’s chain-selection rule (line 5 in Algorithm 2). The
chain of𝐵 is defined recursively by 𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(𝐵) :=(chain-parent(𝐵),
chain-parent(chain-parent(𝐵)),...,𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑠 ).
Observe that𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝐵) fully determines chain-parent(𝐵).
Definition 3. A set of blocks𝑋⊂𝐺 is said to agree in𝐺 if their latest
common chain ancestor is a chain-descendant of 𝑔 = 𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑠(𝐺):
∃𝑔′ :𝑔∈𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(𝑔′)∧∀𝐵∈𝑋 :𝑔′∈𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(𝐵).
3A representative is any block in the inclusive past of the set of tips which does not
belong to the inclusive past of the other sets.
4In short, a block may inherit the cluster from a disagreeing parent thereof only if the
latter’s rank is smaller than former’s rank, or if such a condition was met in a previous
recursion call.
5This procedure borrows from the cascade voting of SPECTRE.
6
The DAG KNIGHT Protocol: A Parameterless Generalization of Nakamoto Consensus
Intuitively, two blocks agree in𝐺 if they agree on𝑔’s successor
in the chain.
Definition 4. For a set𝑋⊂𝑡𝑖𝑝𝑠(𝐺) agreeing in𝐺, the set𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑠𝐺(𝑋)
(representatives) is defined by

𝑥∈𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑋)\𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑡𝑖𝑝𝑠(𝐺)\𝑋) :𝑥 agrees with𝑋
	
.6
Definition 5. For a block 𝐵 and chain-ancestor 𝑔 ∈ 𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(𝐵)
s.t.∃𝑝1,𝑝 2 ∈ 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠(𝐵) which do not agree over 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑔),
𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑔)(𝐵) is defined to be the rank calculated by KNIGHT or-
dering when recursively executing Order-DAG(𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝐵)) and for the
iteration of the While loop where𝑔 was found (line 12 in Algorithm 2).
Definition 6. For𝑈 ⊆ 𝐺,𝑑 ≥ 0, we say that 𝑈 is a 𝑑-UMC of
𝐺 (Uniform Majority Coverage), if 𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑠(𝐺)∈ 𝑈 AND∀𝐵∈ 𝑈 ,
𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝐵)∩𝑈+𝑑≥ 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝐵)∩(𝐺\𝑈)
For any non-negative integer 𝑘,𝑔(𝑘) = 𝑜(𝑘) is a function re-
turning a non-negative integer, used throughout the protocol. We
set𝑔(𝑘) B⌊
√
𝑘⌋. When applied to sets of blocks, max and min 7
operators represent topology relations. That is, if𝐵 = max𝐺 then
𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝐵)∩𝐺 =∅, and likewise if𝐵 = min𝐺 then𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝐵)∩𝐺 =∅.
Algorithm 2 KNIGHT DAG ordering algorithm
Input: 𝐺 – a block DAG
Output: Selected tip of𝐺, Ordering over𝐺’s blocks
1: function Order-DAG(𝐺)
2: if𝐺 is

𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑠
	
then
3: return𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑠,

𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑠

4: for𝐵∈𝑡𝑖𝑝𝑠(𝐺) do
5: chain-parent(𝐵),𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑟 𝐵← Order-DAG 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝐵) 
6: P← 𝑡𝑖𝑝𝑠(𝐺)
7: while
P
 > 1 do
8: 𝑔← latest common chain ancestor of all𝐵∈P
9: PartitionP into maximal disjoint setsP1,..., P𝑛⊂P
s.t. latest common chain ancestor ofP𝑖 is in𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑔)
10: forP𝑖∈

P1,..., P𝑛
	
do
11: rank𝑖← Calculate-Rank

P𝑖,𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 𝐺(𝑔)

12: 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝐺,𝑔← min𝑖∈

1,...,𝑛
	 rank𝑖
13: P ← Tie-Breaking

𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 𝐺(𝑔),

P𝑖 : rank𝑖 =
𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝐺,𝑔
	
14: 𝑝← the single element inP
15: return𝑝,

𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝∥𝑝∥𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝑝)

⊲ operator∥ is sequence
concatenation;𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒 (𝑝) is iterated in hash-based bottom-up topological order
2.6 Reviewing the components of KNIGHT
The algorithms presented above are admittedly involved. In this sub-
section we review their core components. The full version, which
will appear online, includes a line by line explanation of the three
procedures.
6The𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡 operator is used on a set here and reflects the union over 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝐵) for
every block in the set.
7As well as argmax, argmin.
8Meaning that in this call to K-Colouring,𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 (𝐺) is considered to agree with
P𝑖 .
Algorithm 3 Rank calculation procedure
Input: 𝐺 – a block DAG,P – a set of blocks in 𝐺 (typicallyP ⊂
𝑡𝑖𝑝𝑠(𝐺))
Output: The rank ofP in𝐺
1: function Calculate-Rank(P,𝐺 )
2: for𝑘 = 0, 1... ∞ do
3: for𝑟∈𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑠𝐺(P) do
4: C𝑘(𝑟), _← K-Colouring 𝑟,𝐺,𝑘, false
5: if UMC-Voting 𝐺\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑟),C𝑘(𝑟),𝑔(𝑘) > 0
then
6: return𝑘
Algorithm 4 Rank tie-breaking procedure
Input: 𝐺 – a block DAG,P1,..., P𝑚⊂𝑡𝑖𝑝𝑠(𝐺)
Output: A set of tipsP𝑖 wining the tie-breaking
1: function Tie-Breaking(𝐺,P1,..., P𝑚)
2: 𝑘← the mutual rank ofP1,..., P𝑚 in𝐺
3: F, _← K-Colouring 𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙(𝐺),𝐺,𝑔(𝑘), true
4: forP𝑖∈

P1,..., P𝑚
	
do
5: for𝑘′∈

⌊𝑘/2⌋,...,𝑘
	
do
6: _,𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖,𝑘′← K-Colouring 𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙(𝐺),𝐺,𝑘 ′, false
conditioned8 on𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙(𝐺) agreeing withP𝑖
7: 𝐶𝑖← —
𝑘′

𝐵∈F :𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝐵)∩𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑖,𝑘′ >𝑘′	
8: 𝑗← argmin𝑖∈1,...,𝑚 max{𝐶𝑖} (break ties according to hash)
9: returnP𝑗
2.6.1 Greedy maximization. To cope with the intractable nature of
finding the maximal𝑘-cluster, we take an approach similar to [20]
where the NP-hard version was replaced with a greedy procedure,
called therein GHOSTDAG. We thus limit the search to extensions
of𝑘-clusters of the previous tips of the DAG (K-Colouring, line 7).
2.6.2 Revisiting the Majority condition. Instead of requiring that
the selected 𝑘-cluster covers a majority of the DAG (equiv., the
majority of the future set of the genesis block), we check whether
it covers a majority of the future set of each of its member blocks,
including genesis; we refer to this property as uniform majority
coverage, or UMC. Blocks whose future the cluster fails to cover by
majority are cast out as outliers, and the procedure counts them
outside the cluster. The procedure induces a cascading majority
vote (borrowed from [19]) from recent blocks down to the genesis
block, and the latter’s vote dictates whether the majority cover is
satisfactory.
By extending the majority coverage requirement from genesis to
any (non-outlier) block in the𝑘-cluster, we recover the “Markovian”
nature of the coverage property: Any new honest block “resets” the
process by posing an additional challenge to the attacker, namely, to
cover the majority of this new block. Indeed, honest miners possess
a majority of the hashrate, and blocks of honest miners are refer-
enced by their honest counterparts after at most𝐷 seconds, after
which honest blocks are expected to win the block race with high
probability. To account for these𝐷 seconds, we allow the cluster to
cover almost a majority—a deficit of𝑔(𝑘) blocks is permitted (line 5
in Calculate-Rank); this relaxed property is called𝑔(𝑘)-UMC.
7
Michael Sutton and Yonatan Sompolinsky
Algorithm 5𝑘-colouring algorithm
Input: 𝐺 – a block DAG, 𝐶 – a block in 𝐺,𝑘 – a non-negative
integer, free_search – a Boolean indicating if the search can
maximize freely
Output: 𝑘-colouring of𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡𝐺(𝐶),𝑘-chain of𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡𝐺(𝐶)
1: function K-Colouring(𝐶,𝐺,𝑘, free_search)
2: if𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡𝐺(𝐶) =∅ then
3: return∅,∅
4: P←∅
5: for𝐵∈𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠(𝐶) do
6: if𝐵 agrees with𝐶 then
7: 𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑠𝐵,𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛𝐵 ← K-Colouring 𝐵,𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡 (𝐵) ∩
𝐺,𝑘, free_search
8: P←P∪ 𝐵
9: else if free_search OR𝑘 >𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝐺(𝐶) then
10: 𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑠𝐵,𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛𝐵 ← K-Colouring 𝐵,𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡 (𝐵) ∩
𝐺,𝑘, true
11: P←P∪ 𝐵
12: 𝐵max← arg max{|𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑠𝐵| :𝐵∈P} (break ties according to hash)
13: 𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑠𝐺,𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛𝐺←𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑠𝐵max∪

𝐵max
	
,𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛𝐵max∪

𝐵max
	
14: for𝐵∈𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝐵max,𝐺) do in hash-based topological ordering
15: if
𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛𝐺 ∩ 𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝐵)
 ≤ 𝑘 AND 𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑠𝐺 ∩
𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝐵max) <𝑘 then
16: 𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑠𝐺←𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑠𝐺∪

𝐵
	
17: return𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑠𝐺,𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛𝐺
Algorithm 6 UMC cascade voting procedure
Input: 𝐺 – a block DAG,𝑈 ⊆ 𝐺 (typically a𝑘-colouring),𝑒 – a
non-negative integer representing the deficit threshold
Output: The voting result𝑣𝑜𝑡𝑒∈

− 1, 1
	
of𝑈⊆𝐺
1: function UMC-Voting(𝐺,𝑈,𝑒 )
2: 𝑣← ˝
𝐵∈𝑈 UMC-Voting 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝐵),𝑈∩𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝐵),𝑒 
3: return sign  𝑣−
𝐺\𝑈
+𝑒 ⊲ where sign(𝑥) B
1 𝑥≥ 0
−1 𝑥 < 0
2.6.3 Decouple ordering from colouring. Recall that our assump-
tions allow for an attacker to control the propagation time of any
message in the network up to some (unknown) bound𝐷. It follows
that the largest𝑘-cluster, for𝑘≈ 2·𝐷·𝜆 (which bounds the expected
size of an honest block’s natural anticone) is expected to satisfy
the majority coverage property (𝑔(𝑘)-UMC). One would expect,
therefore, that the following procedure would suffice to secure the
ordering: Find the minimal 𝑘 for which the largest 𝑘-cluster satisfies
the𝑔(𝑘)-UMC property, and order the DAG according to that cluster.9
Albeit, this approach would undermine the stability of the order-
ing: If the network’s latency changes, spontaneously or maliciously,
from𝑑≪𝐷 to𝐷 the ordering of the DAG would change retroac-
tively from the largest 𝑘(𝑑)-cluster to the largest 𝑘(𝐷)-cluster,
undermining the convergence guarantee.
To cope with this challenge, we (re)introduce the notion of a
main chain, and order the DAG according to this chain. We show
this chain to be robust even under changes of delays, rendering the
ordering robust. The chain is formed as follows: Each block picks as
9In other words, for𝑘 = 0, 1,... run𝑘-GHOSTDAG, and return the first output that
satisfies the𝑔(𝑘)-UMC property.
its chain predecessor the block which minimizes its own𝑘, or more
accurately, its rank (Order-DAG, line 11). That is, we utilize the
optimization problem of KNIGHT to select the chain-predecessor
of each block rather than to order the entire historical DAG. This
decoupling allows the chain to “represent” different𝑘’s along its
growth, which correspond to the effective latency at the time. For
example, if at chain-level 200 the attacker exposed a side-DAG that
required increasing𝑘 from 5 to 7, the ordering of past blocks would
still be dictated by the chain below level 198, say.
This decoupling of cluster-selection from DAG-ordering spawns
an intricate design space with different inter-dependencies between
cluster-selection and chain-ordering. Interestingly, some natural
candidates turn out to be insecure, erring either on over-stability
(thereby compromising liveness) or on over-flexibility (compro-
mising safety). We strike a balance between these two necessary
objectives by allowing the cluster-selection to deviate from the
chain-selection of lower-ranked blocks (K-Colouring, line 9).
2.6.4 Tie-breaking for recovery. Consider a temporary anomaly
(“Poisson burst”) in the block creation process which led to an ab-
normally high rank𝐾. After the network resumes normal operation,
we would like to recover the normal rank, denoted 𝑘★, or other-
wise liveness would be compromised (the waiting time for liveness
depends on a non-diverging upper bound over the rank); we thus
must guarantee healthy growth of the𝑘★-cluster, even when the
current rank𝐾 is excessively high.
In this context the tie-breaking rule between two chain-tip can-
didates of the same rank turns out to be crucial. A naïve rule would
prefer the larger 𝐾-cluster, yet such a design would allow an at-
tacker to keep the network at its current rank and prevent it from
recovering towards 𝑘★. Instead, we identify the tip whose clus-
ter utilized the excessive rank latest, and prefer its counterpart
(Tie-Breaking algorithm, line 8). The resulting chain-selection rule
forces a tie-preserving attacker to compete on ranks much lower
than the current one, and eventually to compete on the natural
rank,𝑘★.
2.6.5 Adaptiveness to long-term delay changes. In the lack of an
a priori latency bound, a parameterless protocol necessarily per-
forms according to the actual (adversarial) latency, as discussed
in Section 1. However, in the context of a consensus protocol that
serves a continuous queue of transactions, the latency might change
with time. It would then be undesirable if the protocol performs
according to the worst case historical latency rather than the recent
latency in the network. We formalize this requirement in Section 3.
To achieve this property, the protocol defines aconflict hierarchy,
eliminates iteratively the losing candidates, and selects the final
survival as the chain-predecessor. This logic is implemented in the
While loop in Order-DAG (line 7).
2.6.6 Representatives and monotonicity. In theory, an attacker may
attempt to artificially increase the rank of honest blocks by wasting
part of her hashrate to mine blocks that agree with honest blocks
but which do not belong to their𝑘-cluster, where𝑘 is the current
rank of honest blocks. While this scheme can be shown (yet, at
the expense of further complication of the analysis) to be overall
suboptimal on her part, it does undermine a desired “monotonous”
behaviour of the protocol. Consider a DAG𝐺 with two tips𝐵 and𝐶,
8
The DAG KNIGHT Protocol: A Parameterless Generalization of Nakamoto Consensus
and assume that𝐵 “won” and is𝐺’s selected chain tip. Consider the
effect of adding to𝐺 a new block𝐸, which references𝐵 only. Since
𝐸 acknowledges𝐵 but not𝐶, one would expect the addition of𝐸 to
only increase the chance of𝐵 to win over𝐶, and definitely not to
harm it. Alas, if a set of disconnected𝐸’s are added to𝐵’s future in
this manner, they may increase the rank of their part of the DAG,
and in particular may flip the choice and lead to the chain going
through𝐶. To recover the desired monotonous behaviour (thereby
simplifying our security analysis, as a byproduct), we dictate that
𝐶 competes with𝐵 even if𝐵 is no longer a tip of𝐺 (!) Thus, to win
the chain over𝐸,𝐶 must enjoy a rank lower than𝐸 (the new tip)
but also of all blocks in 𝐸’s past (which are not in 𝐶’s past), and
𝐵 in particular; this exemplifies the role of the representative set
(Definition 4) used in line 3 of Calculate-Rank.
2.7 Runtime complexity
The algorithms specified in the previous article terminate in poly-
nomial time:
Proposition 1. Algorithm 2 terminates in polynomial time in |𝐺|,
and returns a tip and an ordering of 𝐺.
Proof. Observe the following facts:
• The while loop in line 7 decreases the size of P at each
iteration.
• Following line 13 it remains thatP ≠∅, thus, after the loop,P
 = 1 (line 14); thus, the return argument is not null, and
is an element inP.
• The overall recursion (line 5) terminates since∀𝐵∈𝑡𝑖𝑝𝑠(𝐺),
𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝐵) ⊊𝐺.
• The procedure Calculate-Rank terminates in polynomial
time, since the output of K-Colouring(𝐶,𝐺,𝑘, ·), for any
block𝐶∈𝐺, returns a k-UMC10, for𝑘 =|𝐺|, since all blocks
in𝐺 belong to its largest|𝐺|-cluster (there are, obviously,
much tighter arguments).
□
In a future version of this paper, we will present an equivalent
specification that takes as input two blocks and returns their respec-
tive ordering. This procedure is useful for certain types of clients
(e.g., what are known as “liteclients”), and can be shown to ter-
minate within a constant (in time) number of steps, concretely, in
O(𝐷·𝜆)2 steps.
3 MODEL AND FORMAL STATEMENT
We follow the prevalent models for a proof-of-work governed net-
work [13, 15] and its extensions to the block DAG framework [11, 19,
20]. A network of nodes (orminers) is denotedN, each node𝑢 main-
taining a replica of the DAG observable to it𝐺𝑢
𝑡 . The setH denotes
nodes that follow the mining protocol, which dictates that every
new block references all tips of the DAG observable to its miner
at its creation, and is broadcast by it immediately to the network.
The attacker deviates arbitrarily from the mining protocol, and can
further accelerate or delay messages from or to honest nodes up to
10As shown in the full proof in Appendix A, UMC-Voting returns a positive sign if𝑈
is a𝑑-UMC.
𝐷𝑡 seconds (𝐷𝑡 depends on time since network conditions and con-
nectivity might change with time); we denote by𝐷max, or simply
𝐷, the maximal𝐷𝑡 across𝑡∈[ 0,∞). Importantly,𝐷 = 𝐷max is a
function of the block size limit denoted𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘 _𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 _𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑡 (KB), since
large messages take longer to propagate. For brevity, we ignore
this parameter, and regard the block size as fixed. We emphasize
that𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘 _𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 _𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑡 can be increased in the same manner than
the block rate𝜆 may be increased, as discussed in Subsection 5.1.
The proof-of-work mechanism targets a certain block creation
rate of𝜆 blocks per second, kept (roughly) constant via a difficulty
adjustment algorithm, similarly to Bitcoin [ 13]. We denote the
proof-of-work protocol by 𝑝𝑜𝑤(𝜆). Block creation thus follows
a Poisson process with parameter 𝜆, and the next block in the
network is created by an honest node with probability 1−𝛼𝑡 , for
some (unknown, potentially dynamic) 0≤𝛼𝑡 <𝛼 (for𝑡∈[ 0,∞)).
If this inequality is guaranteed to hold for some range 𝑡≥𝑠, We
say that𝛼 is an𝑠-updated bound over the attacker’s computational
power; this definition is used below to emphasize a self-stabilizing
property which allows to recover from “51% attacks”.
The DAG ordering rule𝑂𝑅𝐷 is an algorithm that takes as input
a DAG of blocks and returns a linear ordering over its blocks. In our
parameterless model, as in the closely-related partial synchrony
model, the algorithm may take no parameters as input arguments
(such as𝐷,𝛼,𝑘, etc.). We require that all blocks in the DAG were
mined correctly according to𝑝𝑜𝑤(𝜆). If block𝑎 admits a path to
block𝑏 in the DAG,𝑎 was necessarily created after 𝑏. The DAG
topology induces therefore a natural partial ordering, and the gist
of the ordering rule is to extend this to a full ordering over the
DAG.
3.1 Convergence of the ordering
The following definitions adapt and extend the model from PHAN-
TOM:
Property 1. An ordering rule𝑂𝑅𝐷 is said to be:
• Parameterless if its only input argument is a block DAG 𝐺; all
blocks in𝐺 must be mined correctly according to the proof-of-
work protocol𝑝𝑜𝑤(𝜆).
• (1−𝛼)-convergent, if∀𝑡 > 0,∀𝑢∈H and∀𝑏∈𝐺𝑢
𝑡 :
lim𝑟→∞𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘(𝑏,𝑡,𝑟) = 0,
even when a fraction of at most𝛼 of the mining power is byzan-
tine; the convergence rate of𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘(·) should be inO(𝑓(𝐷,𝜆,𝛼)),
for some function 𝑓 , and, in particular, may not grow indefi-
nitely with𝑡.11
• Scalable if there exists a constant 𝛼 > 0 such that it(1−𝛼)-
converges for all 𝜆 > 0; the maximal such 𝛼 is called the
security threshold of𝑂𝑅𝐷 .
• Self stabilizing if the security threshold of𝑂𝑅𝐷 depends on the
𝑡-updated bound over the attacker’s computational power. 12
11Growing indefinitely with𝑡 would imply that confirmation times are not bounded.
12This property, which is satisfied by many proof-of-work consensus protocols, implies
that the protocol recovers from periods where the attacker’s computational power
exceeded the allowed threshold, and specifically from what is known as “51% attacks”.
In fact, some of these protocols, including KNIGHT, satisfy a stronger property and
allow the computational power of the attacker to exceed the bound for some limited
time-intervals in the future. Delving into these nuances is outside our scope.
9
Michael Sutton and Yonatan Sompolinsky
• Adaptive if the convergence rate of 𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘(𝑏,𝑡,𝑟) depends on
the recent delay rather than the historical delay; formally, if
it is inO(max𝑠≥𝑡((𝑔(𝑠−𝑡,𝛼)· 𝑓(𝐷𝑠,𝜆,𝛼)))) . The function
𝑔 represents the “memory” of the process, i.e., how far into the
past current values of 𝐷 (𝐷𝑠 ) impact convergence.
Here,𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘(𝑏,𝑡,𝑟) is the probability that the ordering between𝑏
and any other block𝑐 changes between time𝑡 and𝑡+𝑟 [20].
3.2 Formal statement
We are finally ready to formally state the achievement of the KNIGHT
protocol:
Theorem 2. KNIGHT’s ordering rule (Algorithm 2) is parameter-
less, scalable, self-stabilizing, and adaptive.
To the best of our knowledge, KNIGHT is the first proof-of-work
based protocol to satisfy all of these properties. For some compar-
isons: NC is not scalable, since its security threshold deteriorates
as the block creation rate𝜆 grows; PHANTOM is not parameter-
less, since its ordering rule takes as input𝑘, corresponding to the
network’s worst case latency, and for the same reason it is not
adaptive.13 SPECTRE does not guarantee convergence altogether
[19].
In Section 4 we will further shed light on the convergence rate
of KNIGHT, specifically, on the order of the functions𝑓 and𝑔. In
Appendix A we will provide a rigorous proof of Theorem 2.
4 CONFIRMATION TIMES
As common in proof-of-work protocols, the procedure for deter-
mining the robustness of the ordering – i.e., evaluating the func-
tion𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘 – is done by the client locally, outside the context of
consensus. The performance of the protocol in terms of speed is
captured by the convergence rate of 𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘 . This metric should ar-
guably be dissected into two modes, optimistic and pessimistic.
In the former scenario, all participating nodes (miners) seem to
behave properly, and in particular there is no visible split in the
DAG; formally: all blocks agree on and amplify the entire chain
selection, save perhaps a constant-size suffix. In this optimistic sce-
nario, KNIGHT performs very fast, and transactions may be safely
confirmed after at mostO  (ln(1/𝜖)+ 𝐷·𝜆)/(1− 2𝛼)+( 𝐷·𝜆)2
steps, orO
 ln(1/𝜖)
𝜆 +𝐷

/(1− 2𝛼)+ 𝐷2·𝜆

seconds. In terms of
Definition 1, the latter expression describes the asymptotic be-
haviour of the function 𝑓 . The function𝑔 defined therein can be
shown to decay exponentially fast in its argument, implying that
confirmation times are highly dependent on the recent worst-case
latency in the network, and are insensitive to past or future network
hiccups.
In the pessimistic case, where an attacker continuously publishes
late blocks and thereby slows down chain solidification, our bounds
over confirmation times present an order-of-magnitude slow down:
O( exp(𝑐·𝐷·𝜆/(1− 2·𝛼))+ ln(1/𝜖)/( 1− 2𝛼))) steps. This de-
scribes the asymptotic behaviour of𝑓 in the pessimistic scenario
(the behaviour of𝑔 remains the same). We stress that these bounds
are far from tight—they result from the intractability of analyzing
13Indeed, any latency-parameterized protocol would not be adaptive. However, one
may conceive a parameterless protocol that is not adaptive.
the chain solidification under the most sophisticated attack, and
further grant the attacker unrealistic communication capabilities.
To overcome the intractability, and inspired by a technique from
PHANTOM paper, our analysis waits for a rare event in which
the honest network mined𝑍·𝐷·𝜆 consecutive blocks in a chain,
for some predetermined constant 𝑍. This event is guaranteed to
happen within a constant number of steps. While this condition is
an overkill, relaxing it and tightening the confirmation times is a
complex task, and we defer it to future work.
Notwithstanding, an attacker cannot slow down the confirmation
times of regular transactions, even if it carries out a visible attack.
As long as the user did not publish an explicit visible conflict to her
transaction, its receiver will be able to accept it in the same order-
of-magnitude as in the optimistic scenario. Indeed, in this case, the
ordering between the published transaction and other transactions
would be commutative, and thus the pending chain solidification
would be inconsequential to this transaction. Admittedly, in the
case of trading against a smart contract, this commutative property
might not hold.14
The reader may find the comparison between asymptotic con-
firmation times in KNIGHT and other proof-of-work protocols in
Table 1 insightful. Among the protocols under comparison, NC is
the fastest to converge under visible (liveness) attacks, yet it con-
verges only for the range𝛼∈( 0, 1/(1+𝐷·𝜆)) [21]. SPECTRE is the
fastest to converge under no visible attacks, it converges according
to the current (adversarial) latency𝐷𝑡 , and does so slightly faster
than KNIGHT does. KNIGHT, in turn, converges in the invisible
and visible attack cases, and does so corresponding to𝐷𝑡 as well,
in contrast to PHANTOM which converges in terms of𝐷max =𝐷
only. In Section 6 we will survey additional protocols.
Finally, we note that confirmation time analysis of KNIGHT can
be tightened significantly when restricted to the attacker range
𝛼 < 1/3. We defer this improvement to future work.
5 IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
An implementation of Algorithm 2 and its subprocedures will be
made available online.
5.1 Block size limit
So far we treated synchronous protocols as assuming a bound
on latency𝐷. In fact, increasing𝐷 and decreasing𝜆 by the same
multiplicative factor has no effect and could be regarded as mere
change in units. Thus, in truth, the latency assumption takes the
form of a bound over𝐷·𝜆.
Recall that𝐷 depends on the size of messages𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘 _𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 _𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑡
(Section 3). Thus, increasing the block size would have a similar
effect to that of increasing the block rate 𝜆.15 Consequently, in
the same manner in which scalable protocols (Definition 1) re-
main secure under any𝜆, they remain secure under any block size
𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘 _𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 _𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑡 . In the following subsection we discuss whether
scalable parameterless protocols, such as KNIGHT, need to limit𝜆
or𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘 _𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 _𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑡 .
14These scenarios correspond, essentially, to the consensus properties safety, liveness,
and weak liveness, the latter defined in [19].
15Notwithstanding, the function𝐷(𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘 _𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 _𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑡) is nonhomogeneous.
10
The DAG KNIGHT Protocol: A Parameterless Generalization of Nakamoto Consensus
Visible attack No visible attack
NC O
 
(ln(1/𝜖)+𝐷𝑡𝜆)
max
n
0, 1−𝛼
1+𝐷𝑡·𝜆−𝛼
o
!
(same as the visible attack case, asymptotically)
PHANTOM O

exp

𝑐1 𝑫max𝜆
1−2𝛼

+ ln(1/𝜖)
1−2𝛼

O
 ln(1/𝜖)+𝑫max𝜆
1−2𝛼

SPECTRE ∞ O
 ln(1/𝜖)+𝑫𝒕𝜆
1−2𝛼

KNIGHT O

exp

𝑐2 𝑫𝒕𝜆
1−2𝛼

+ ln(1/𝜖)
1−2𝛼

O
 ln(1/𝜖)+𝑫𝒕𝜆
1−2𝛼 +(𝑫𝒕𝜆)2

Table 1: A comparison of the convergence rates of different proof-of-work protocols, in terms of time-steps (equiv., number
of blocks), in the presence of a visible ongoing liveness attack (left column) and when no such attack is carried visibly (right
column).𝐷max denotes an a priori upper bound on the worst case latency, whereas 𝐷𝑡 denotes an upper bound on the current
latency (including possible delays by an adversary). To get expected confirmation times in seconds, multiply each expression
by the expected block interval 𝜆−1.
5.2 Difficulty Adjustment Algorithm (DAA)
NC and other proof-of-work protocols employ a DAA that increases
the difficulty-target of creating new blocks when the computational
power contributed to block creation (aka hashrate) increases, and
vice versa when it decreases; refer to [8] for a formal treatment. It is
common to ascribe the Sybil-resiliency of the system to this mech-
anism. However, in truth, proof-of-work suffices to protect against
Sybil-nodes even without any DAA. In fact, even if nodes were
free to choose the difficulty of their own blocks, one could devise a
secure consensus protocol by granting each block a weight, or “vot-
ing power”, in proportion to its difficulty. Instead, the motivation
for DAA is threefold:
• Existing protocols operate in the synchronous setup which
assumes an a priori bound over the number of blocks created
per one unit of delay, i.e.,𝐷·𝜆. For instance, NC assumes
𝐷·𝜆≪ 1, and PHANTOM assumes𝐷·𝜆≪𝑘+1. To preserve
these bounds and keep the protocol secure,𝜆 cannot increase
indefinitely, and must be regulated by the protocol.
• DoS prevention: The capacity of the network and of nodes
is limited. The DAA throttles the block creation rate and
ensures that the maximum capacity is not exceeded.
• Some application considerations necessitate access to abso-
lute time, such as the regulation of minting, or timelocks.
These applications use the block count as a proxy for abso-
lute time.
The first consideration above is irrelevant to KNIGHT, which can
cope with dynamic𝐷 and𝜆 (and𝐷·𝜆). While KNIGHT still requires
DAA for the latter considerations – particularly DoS prevention
– it could be satisfied perhaps with relaxed versions of DAA. we
hope that this discussion spurs new ideas for proof-of-work system
designs in the parameterless setup.
6 RELATED WORK
We conclude this paper with a survey of related work. DAG-based
protocols have been mentioned extensively throughout the pa-
per, see for example Table 1. Additional relevant protocols in-
clude GHOST, which is an alternative chain-selection rule to NC’s
longest chain, and which performs similarly (in qualitative terms)
to NC [9, 10].
Thunderella [17] is a permissionless protocol that is responsive
in the strong sense of performing according to the network’s actual
latency; it requires a super majority of 75% to be honest for this
optimistic mode (compared to KNIGHT’s 51% majority), as well
as the pre-selection of a special “accelerator” node, which com-
promises the permissionless property of the system. The works
in [3, 7, 22] maintain 𝑘 parallel NC chains, where each block is
assigned in random to one of these chains. The ordering rule must
then specify the respective ordering between blocks in different
chains. These works operate in the synchronous setup, as they
pre-assume𝑘 so as to ensure that each chain grows with negli-
gible latency; conceptually, as observed by [ 20], these protocols
require𝐷·𝜆/(𝑘+ 1)≪ 1. Prism [3] claim a confirmation time of
O( max(𝑐1(𝛼)· 𝐷,𝑐 2(𝛼)· 𝐵𝑣· ln(1/𝜖))) seconds; here,𝐵𝑣/𝐶 effec-
tively represents the number of blocks per second (𝜆, in our work).
Importantly, in the above term𝐷 stands as a function that depends
only on network latency and does not depend on the block message
size (denoted𝐵𝑣, and in our work𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘 _𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 _𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑡 ). We find this
claim questionable, and argue that if indeed 𝐷 does not depend
on𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘 _𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 _𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑡 , then “proposer blocks” and “voter blocks” in
Prism do not in fact attest that “transaction blocks” referenced by
them have been fully published, which opens up data availability
attacks. The number of chains in Prism further depends on the
parameter𝜖.
The work in [18] proposes a series of protocols, Slush, Snowflake,
and Snowball, which use a network sampling technique to resolve
conflicts between nodes. The paper claims very fast confirmation
times (1.35 seconds). Yet, these protocols operate in the synchronous
model (see Section 2, “Achieving Liveness”), and thus confirmation
times in the pessimistic case are not responsive to the network’s
latency. The protocols are further limited to a fixed confidence
parameter𝜖 (see e.g. Subsection 3.2 therein), similarly to Prism.
Finally, this line of work builds on novel assumptions on nodes’
ability to sample the network.
Our work was motivated by Pass and Shi’s impossibility result
regarding responsive consensus protocols [16], which is an adap-
tation of the classic 34% byzantine threshold bound on partially
synchronous protocols by Dwork et al. [6] to permissionless set-
tings. To circumvent this impossibility, we focused on a relaxed
property that aims to be responsive to the maximal latency causable
by an adversary, rather than to the observable latency; accordingly,
11
Michael Sutton and Yonatan Sompolinsky
Theorem 2 does not state KNIGHT as being responsive. KNIGHT
respects the bound of [6, 16] in that it is responsive to the current
worst-case adversarial latency ( Δ, in their model) but not to the
actual observable one (𝛿 therein). Indeed, the impossibility result
(Section 9.2 in [16]) relies directly on the attacker increasing the
delay from𝛿 to Δ after transactions have been confirmed. In our
model, however, transaction confirmation times depend on Δ (𝐷𝑡 ,
in our notation).
For discussion of tighter transaction confirmation policies, which
employ absolute time in addition to the ledger state, see [14]. The
results therein apply, qualitatively, to KNIGHT as well.
The achievement of KNIGHT is made possible by the decoupling
of the canonical protocol dictating the ordering over all transactions,
and the client protocol for estimating its finality (Subsection 1.4).
A similar decoupling was previously proposed in the Flexible BFT
paper [12]. That work operates in the traditional permissioned
setup, and is still restricted by the 34% threshold for byzantine
resilience of partially synchronous protocols, by Dwork et al. [6].
To reason about the fundamental difference in paradigm, observe
that the consensus participants in Flexible BFT are not agnostic
to the finality of transactions—they reach eventual agreement on
finality. In contrast, proof-of-work miners running KNIGHT need
not reach any agreement on finality of transactions, and are in fact
not required to interpret the state whatsoever. We believe that this
agnosticism towards the state is necessary when designing a 50%
BFT parameterless consensus protocol.
REFERENCES
[1] http://bitcoinfibre.org/stats.html.
[2] http://kgi.kaspad.net/.
[3] Vivek Bagaria, Sreeram Kannan, David Tse, Giulia Fanti, and Pramod Viswanath.
Prism: Deconstructing the blockchain to approach physical limits. In Proceedings
of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security ,
pages 585–602, 2019.
[4] Shehar Bano, Alberto Sonnino, Mustafa Al-Bassam, Sarah Azouvi, Patrick Mc-
Corry, Sarah Meiklejohn, and George Danezis. Sok: Consensus in the age of
blockchains. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM Conference on Advances in Financial
Technologies, pages 183–198, 2019.
[5] Edsger W Dijkstra. Self-stabilizing systems in spite of distributed control. Com-
munications of the ACM, 17(11):643–644, 1974.
[6] Cynthia Dwork, Nancy Lynch, and Larry Stockmeyer. Consensus in the presence
of partial synchrony. Journal of the ACM (JACM) , 35(2):288–323, 1988.
[7] Matthias Fitzi, Peter Gazi, Aggelos Kiayias, and Alexander Russell. Parallel
chains: Improving throughput and latency of blockchain protocols via parallel
composition. IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2018:1119, 2018.
[8] Juan Garay, Aggelos Kiayias, and Nikos Leonardos. The bitcoin backbone protocol
with chains of variable difficulty. In Annual International Cryptology Conference,
pages 291–323. Springer, 2017.
[9] Aggelos Kiayias and Giorgos Panagiotakos. On trees, chains and fast transactions
in the blockchain. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2016/545, 2016.
[10] Lucianna Kiffer, Rajmohan Rajaraman, and Abhi Shelat. A better method to ana-
lyze blockchain consistency. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference
on Computer and Communications Security , pages 729–744, 2018.
[11] Yoad Lewenberg, Yonatan Sompolinsky, and Aviv Zohar. Inclusive block chain
protocols. In International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Secu-
rity, pages 528–547. Springer, 2015.
[12] Dahlia Malkhi, Kartik Nayak, and Ling Ren. Flexible byzantine fault tolerance. In
Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications
security, pages 1041–1053, 2019.
[13] Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system, 2008.
[14] Seb Neumayer, Mayank Varia, and Ittay Eyal. An analysis of acceptance policies
for blockchain transactions. Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2018.
[15] Rafael Pass, Lior Seeman, and Abhi Shelat. Analysis of the blockchain protocol
in asynchronous networks. IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2016:454, 2016.
[16] Rafael Pass and Elaine Shi. Hybrid consensus: Efficient consensus in the permis-
sionless model, 2016.
[17] Rafael Pass and Elaine Shi. Thunderella: Blockchains with optimistic instant
confirmation. In Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications
of Cryptographic Techniques, pages 3–33. Springer, 2018.
[18] Team Rocket, Maofan Yin, Kevin Sekniqi, Robbert van Renesse, and Emin Gün
Sirer. Scalable and probabilistic leaderless bft consensus through metastability.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08936, 2019.
[19] Yonatan Sompolinsky, Yoad Lewenberg, and Aviv Zohar. SPECTRE: A fast and
scalable cryptocurrency protocol. IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive , 2016:1159,
2016.
[20] Yonatan Sompolinsky, Shai Wyborski, and Aviv Zohar. PHANTOM and
GHOSTDAG: A scalable generalization of nakamoto consensus. Cryptology
ePrint Archive, Report 2018/104, 2018. https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/104.
[21] Yonatan Sompolinsky and Aviv Zohar. Secure high-rate transaction processing in
bitcoin. In International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security ,
pages 507–527. Springer, 2015.
[22] Haifeng Yu, Ivica Nikolic, Ruomu Hou, and Prateek Saxena. Ohie: Blockchain
scaling made simple. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12628, 2018.
A SECURITY PROOF
A.1 Definitions and Notation
Definition 7. 𝐺𝑡 is the oracle DAG at time 𝑡. Similarly, for block 𝐵
mined at𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(𝐵), we abuse notation and define 𝐺𝐵 B𝐺𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(𝐵) .
Definition 8. F𝑘(𝐵,𝐺) is the maximization-free𝑘-cluster of block
𝐵 as calculated by the call K-Colouring(𝐵,𝐺,𝑘, true) in Alg. 5.
Definition 9. C𝑘(𝐵,𝐺) is the 𝑘-cluster of block 𝐵 as calculated
by K-Colouring(𝐵,𝐺,𝑘, false) in Alg. 5. We use C(𝐵) to denote
C𝑘(𝐵,𝐺) for the special case 𝑘 =𝑘★. When the context is clear we
abbreviate and write simplyC𝑘(𝐵).
Definition 10. 𝑘-chain(𝐵,𝐺) is the chain of 𝑘-maximizing blocks
used by K-Colouring(𝐵,𝐺,𝑘,𝑓𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒 ) in order to composeC𝑘(𝐵,𝐺).
More concretely, the𝑘-chain parent of block 𝐵 is𝐵max, assigned at
line 12 of Alg. 5, and so on, recursively.
Definition 11. C𝑘(𝐵) is the complementary set of C𝑘(𝐵) at
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(𝐵). More formally,C𝑘(𝐵) B𝐺𝐵\C𝑘(𝐵)
Definition 12. The merge set of block 𝑥 is defined by
𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑡(𝑥) B 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑥)\𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(chain-parent(𝑥)). We say block
𝑥 is merging block𝑦 if𝑦∈𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑡(𝑥).
The set of blocks mined after and before block𝑥 (in absolute time,
as seen by an external oracle), are denoted before(𝑥) and after(𝑥)
respectively. We use subscript notation𝑋𝑥⟩,𝑋⟨𝑥 and𝑋⟨𝑥,𝑦⟩ over
a set of blocks𝑋 , to indicate𝑋\ after(𝑥),𝑋 ∩ after(𝑥) and𝑋∩
after(𝑥)\ after(𝑦) respectively.
We notate 𝑥 ⇒ 𝑦 if𝑦 = chain-parent(𝑥). Similarly, we use
𝑥 ⇒𝑘 𝑦 if𝑦 is the𝑘-chain parent of𝑥.
A.2 K-cluster Combinatorics
Unlike the GHOSTDAG 𝑘-colouring algorithm (Algorithm 1 in
[20]), the K-Colouring procedure in Algorithm 5 uses weaker
colouring rules which give precedence to past and current chain
blocks (line 15 therein). Nonetheless, as we show below, for some
larger𝐾 >𝑘 the resulting cluster is still a valid𝐾-cluster. Denote
𝐾(𝑘) B(2𝑘+ 1)(𝑘+ 1).
Lemma 1. For any block 𝐵 and DAG𝐺, the cluster 𝐶 returned by
K-Colouring(𝐵,𝐺,𝑘, ·) is a𝐾(𝑘)-cluster.
Proof. The first condition in line 15 implies that a block added to
the colouring cannot have more than𝑘 chain-blocks in its anticone.
12
The DAG KNIGHT Protocol: A Parameterless Generalization of Nakamoto Consensus
Hence by the time 𝐵 is coloured and added to 𝐶, is holds that
|𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝐵)∩𝐶|≤(𝑘+ 1)(𝑘+ 1). This follows from the fact that
each of the𝑘 chain blocks prior to the chain-block merging𝐵 has
merged at most𝑘 blocks (from the second condition in line 15).
Likewise, only the next 𝑘 chain-blocks can colour blocks ∈
𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝐵), resulting in𝑘(𝑘+ 1) more blocks. Combined we get
|𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝐵)∩𝐶|≤(2𝑘+ 1)(𝑘+ 1) =𝐾(𝑘) □
Lemma 2. Let𝐵1,𝐵 2,...,𝐵 𝑛−1,𝐵𝑛 be a sequence of 𝑘-chain blocks
s.t.𝐵𝑖−1 ⇒𝑘 𝐵𝑖 and let𝐵∈C𝑘(𝐵1)\C𝑘(𝐵2) s.t.𝐵𝑛 is the maximal
element∈𝑘-chain(𝐵1)∩𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝐵); thenC𝑘(𝐵1)\C𝑘(𝐵𝑛)≤ 4𝐾(𝑘).
Proof. 16 The set𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝐵1)\𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝐵𝑛) is covered by the anti-
cones of𝐵,𝐵 2,𝐵𝑛−1,𝐵𝑛∈C𝑘(𝐵1), which immediately implies its
intersection withC𝑘(𝐵1) is≤ 4𝐾(𝑘). To see the covering, assume
there exists a block 𝐷 not in any anticone, so 𝐷 ∉ 𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝐵);
if 𝐷 ∈ 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝐵) then it must be ∈ 𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝐵2), otherwise
𝐵 ∈ 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝐵2); if on the other hand 𝐷 ∈ 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝐵) it cannot be
in𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝐵𝑛−1) since that will contradict maximality of𝐵𝑛, thus
it must be∈𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝐵𝑛−1) which implies𝐷∈𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝐵𝑛), a con-
tradiction. □
Lemma 3. Let𝐵1,...,𝐵 𝑛−1,𝐵𝑛 be a sequence of 𝑘-chain blocks s.t.
𝐵𝑖−1 ⇒𝑘 𝐵𝑖 and let 𝐵∈C 𝑘(𝐵1) s.t.𝐵𝑛 is the maximal element ∈
𝑘-chain(𝐵1)∩𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝐵), then  𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝐵𝑛)\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝐵) ∩C𝑘(𝐵1)≤
2𝐾(𝑘).
Proof. The set𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝐵𝑛)\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝐵) is covered by the an-
ticones of𝐵,𝐵𝑛−1∈C𝑘(𝐵1), which immediately implies its inter-
section withC𝑘(𝐵1) is≤ 2𝐾(𝑘). To see the covering, assume there
exists a block in this set s.t. 𝐷 ∉𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝐵), ∉𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝐵𝑛−1);
so𝐷∈𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝐵) hence it cannot be in𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝐵𝑛−1) since that will
contradict maximality of 𝐵𝑛, so it must be ∈ 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝐵𝑛−1) which
implies𝐷 ∉ 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝐵𝑛), a contradiction. □
A.3 Main theorem
We are now ready to prove our main result. For the reader’s conve-
nience, we first restate the claim:
Theorem 2. KNIGHT’s ordering rule (Algorithm 2) is parameter-
less, scalable, self-stabilizing, and adaptive.
A.4 Proof
We fix an arbitrary honest node𝑢∈ℎ𝑜𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑡 and assume its point of
view. We thus abbreviate𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑡 to represent the virtual block of
node𝑢 at time𝑡. We additionally regard the pov of a hypothetical
oracle node that sees all blocks immediately upon their creation,
including the attacker; in fact, the omnipotent attacker in our model
enjoys the same pov as the oracle node.
Below, we will skip proofs of the more straightforward claims.
We will close this gap in a future version of this paper.
A.4.1 Chain growth. We begin by analyzing the growth rate of the
maximization-free colouringF𝑘(𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑡) and show that there ex-
ists a “natural”𝑘 for which this colouring yields> 50% growth. This
“free-search” algorithm can be seen as a modified GHOSTDAG [20],
where by weakening the colouring rules we were able to strengthen
16The proofs of the current and following lemmas are in spirit of PHANTOM’s
freeloader bound [20].
the growth-rate proven for GHOSTDAG from achieving a relative
majority (over the attacker), to achieving an absolute majority.
Claim 1. There exists𝑘𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑙 , depending only on 𝐷,𝛼 and𝜆, s.t.
the expected growth ofF𝑘𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑙(𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑡) is strictly larger than 0.5;
that is,
E F𝑘𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑙(𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑡+𝑟)
−
F𝑘★(𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑡)
 > 0.5𝑟𝜆.
We now use the maximization-free expected growth-rate, and
utilize the Tie-Breaking algorithm, to show that larger-than 50%
growth-rate is achieved also for the non-free colouring, albeit with
a larger𝑘 parameter.
Proposition 3. There exists𝑘★, depending only on 𝐷,𝛼 and𝜆 s.t.
the expected growth ofC𝑘★(𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑡) is strictly larger than 0.5; that
is,
E C𝑘★(𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑡+𝑟)
−
C𝑘★(𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑡)
 > 0.5𝑟𝜆.
Corollary 2. If𝑈 is𝑑-UMC of𝐺, then UMC-Voting 𝐺,𝑈,𝑑  > 0.
Claim 3. UMC-Voting 𝐺𝑡,C𝑘★(𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑡),𝑔(𝑘★) has positive
value in expectation.
A.4.2 Liveness collapse.
Definition 13. The attacker advantage 𝑎𝑑𝑣(𝑡) at time 𝑡 as
𝑎𝑑𝑣(𝑡) B max𝐵∈C𝑘★(𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑡) 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝐵)∩(𝐺𝑡\C𝑘★(𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑡))−
𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝐵)∩C𝑘★(𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑡).
Lemma 4. The attacker advantage 𝑎𝑑𝑣(𝑡) is upper bounded by a
stochastic process which admits a stationary distribution with 𝐶0 =
O(𝑘𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑙) skew and an exponentially decaying tail.
Definition 14. A burst eventB𝑡,𝑍 is an honest chain burst of size
𝐶0+ 3𝑍 starting at time𝑡, where𝑍 is a function of 𝐾(𝑘★).
LetB denote the sequence of blocks constituting the burst event
B𝑡,𝑍 and letB𝑖 be the𝑖’th block from the start of the event. Denote
the particular blocks s BB1,𝜙 BB𝐶0, d BB𝐶0+𝑍, e BB𝐶0+2𝑍 .
These blocks represent the starting point s of the event, the pivot
block𝜙 which we claim to be on any future honest chain, thedefeat
block d representing the point where the attacker is in sufficient
deficit, and the end block of the burst, e.
Definition 15. An honest block-race win eventW𝑡 is the event that
starting from time𝑡,∀𝑠 >𝑡,C(𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑠)⟨𝑡≥C(𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑠)⟨𝑡
Definition 16. The event-sequenceE𝑡,𝑍 is defined to be the sequence
of events (i)𝑎𝑑𝑣(𝑡)≤𝐶0, (ii) followed by a burst B𝑡,𝑍 , (iii) followed
by a block-race winW𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(e) . Note that all events are independent
and have positive probability.
Definition 17. A is the set of non-convinced blocks following the
burst event, i.e., the set

𝐵∈𝐺⟨e,∞⟩ :𝜙 ∉𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(𝐵)
	
.
Definition 18.H𝑐 is the set of chain blocks of honest node𝑢, starting
from block d of the burst event, i.e., the set

𝐵 ∈ 𝐺⟨d,∞⟩ :∃𝑡 >
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(d),𝐵∈𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑡)
	
.
Claim 4. For block𝑎∈A , denote𝑎1 = min𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(𝑎)∩after(e) and
𝑎2 = max𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(𝑎)∩ before(s). Then it holds that ∀𝑝∈B ⟨𝜙,𝑝 ∈
𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝑎1)∪𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝑎2).
13
Michael Sutton and Yonatan Sompolinsky
Proof. Assume there exists such 𝑝 ∉ 𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝑎1) ∪
𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝑎2), then𝑝∈ 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎1)∩𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑎2), so𝑝∈ 𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(𝑎),
contradicting𝑎∈A . □
Claim 5. For block𝑎∈A ,C𝑘(𝑎)∩B⟨𝜙≤ 2𝐾(𝑘).
Proof. Follows from Claim 4 and from the definition of a 𝑘-
cluster. □
The proof of the claim below assumes that the colouring of
𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(𝐵) coincides with𝑘-chain(𝐵,𝐺), for any𝑘 and for any sub-
DAG𝐺. Following the proof we alleviate this assumption. Addition-
ally, for legibility, the proof does not distinguish explicitly between
𝑘★ and𝐾(𝑘★). This merely means that some of the constants such
as𝑍 need to be set larger and with respect to 𝐾(𝑘★) rather than
𝑘★.
Claim 6. (main claim) Conditioned on the occurrence of event-
sequenceE𝑡,𝑍 , it holds that for any ℎ∈H𝑐\A , and for any 𝑎∈A
mergingℎ,
𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)∩ after(ℎ)\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (ℎ)≥C (ℎ)⟨d−C(ℎ)⟨d.
Proof. Assume for contradiction the claim is false. We look at
the minimal eventℎ,𝑎 violating the claim statement, i.e.,𝑎∈A is a
merging block ofℎ∈H𝑐\A and𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)∩after(ℎ)\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (ℎ) <
C(ℎ)⟨d−C(ℎ)⟨d.
Denote𝑔 to be the most recent shared chain-ancestor ofℎ and𝑎,
i.e.,𝑔 = max𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(ℎ)∩𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(𝑎). We analyze the run of Algorithm
2 for the recursive call where 𝐺 = 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎) (line 5), and for the
iteration of the While loop at which 𝑔 is obtained (line 8), and
reach a contradiction to the algorithm’s decision. Throughout the
proof and sub-claims, we implicitly use a context DAG C which
all sets are intersected with. We set the broader context to be C =
𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑔)∩𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎), however at some inner arguments we narrow
the context further.
From minimality of 𝑎 we have that 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (ℎ)∩A = ∅. To
see this, assume otherwise and let 𝑎′ = min𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (ℎ)∩A .
So ℎ ∈ 𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑡(𝑎′) since ℎ ∉ A,𝑎′ ∈ A. Additionally,
since 𝑎′ ∈ 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎) it holds that 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎′) ⊂ 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎), hence
𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎′)∩after(ℎ)\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (ℎ)⊂𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)∩after(ℎ)\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (ℎ) <
C(ℎ)⟨d−C(ℎ)⟨d, contradicting minimality of𝑎.
We now prove that ∀𝑞 ∈ 𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(ℎ)∩A ,𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘 C(ℎ) <
𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘 C(𝑞).
Claim 6.1. C(ℎ) is a  4𝑘★+ 2-UMC of C\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (ℎ).
Proof. In the following, we narrow the implicit context to be
C\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (ℎ).
By definition of a UMC it needs to be shown that every block
inC(ℎ) has bounded negative score (within the context). More
formally, we need to show that for every block𝑏∈C (ℎ), it holds
that𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑏)∩C(ℎ)+ 4𝑘★+ 2≥ 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑏)\C(ℎ).
Intuitively, while blocks before and during the start of the burst
enjoy the natural advantage of the burst, for blocks following
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(d) a more sophisticated argument, using the contradiction
hypothesis, is required. We thus begin by proving a tighter result for
chain blocks mined after𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(d), subsequently using it to prove
the bound for all blocks inC(ℎ)⟨d.
Claim 6.1.1. ∀𝑝 ∈ 𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(ℎ)⟨d,𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑝)∩C (ℎ)+ 2𝑘★+ 2≥
𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑝)\C(ℎ).
Proof. Note that𝑝∈H𝑐\A since𝑝∈𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(ℎ),ℎ∈H𝑐\A ,
thus from minimality ofℎ,𝑎 we have that after(𝑝)\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑝)≥
C(𝑝)⟨d−C(𝑝)⟨d.
Partition after(𝑝) into the following disjoint sets: 𝑚 B
𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑝)∩C(ℎ),𝑣 B after(𝑝)\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑝) and𝑢 B 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑝)\
C(ℎ). Additionally, defineℓ B after(ℎ). The following claims show
relations regarding these definitions.
Claim 6.1.1.1. C(ℎ)−C(𝑝)≥𝑢+𝑣−ℓ−𝑘★− 1.
Proof. Since𝑝∈𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(ℎ) it follows by incrementality ofC(ℎ)
over𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(ℎ) thatC(𝑝) ⊂ C(ℎ). It also follows by 𝑘★-cluster
anticone bound that𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝑝)∩C(ℎ)≤𝑘★+ 1.
We now contrast both expressionsC(ℎ)−C(𝑝) and𝑢+𝑣−ℓ
with the set𝐺⟨𝑝,ℎ⟩\C(ℎ) and show that they differ only by𝑘★+ 1.
Observe thatC(𝑝) =𝐺𝑝\C(𝑝) =𝐺𝑝\C(ℎ)+𝐺𝑝∩(C (ℎ)\
C(𝑝)), and thatC(ℎ) =𝐺ℎ\C(ℎ). Thus by subtraction we obtain
C(ℎ)−C(𝑝) =(𝐺ℎ\𝐺𝑝)\C (ℎ)−𝐺𝑝∩(C(ℎ)\C(𝑝)) =𝐺⟨𝑝,ℎ⟩\
C(ℎ)−( before(𝑝)\𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑝))∩C (ℎ).
On the other hand𝑣+𝑢−ℓ = after(𝑝)\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑝)+𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑝)\
C(ℎ)− after(ℎ) =(after(𝑝)\ 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑝))\C (ℎ)+( after(𝑝)\
𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑝))∩C (ℎ)+ 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑝)\C (ℎ)− after(ℎ) = 𝐺⟨𝑝,ℎ⟩\
C(ℎ)+( after(𝑝)\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑝))∩C (ℎ).
Combining both parts we have C(ℎ)− C(𝑝)+( before(𝑝)\
𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑝))∩C (ℎ) = 𝐺⟨𝑝,ℎ⟩\C (ℎ) = 𝑣+𝑢− ℓ−( after(𝑝)\
𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑝))∩C (ℎ), thusC(ℎ)−C(𝑝) =𝑣+𝑢−ℓ−𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝑝)∩
C(ℎ)≥𝑣+𝑢−ℓ−𝑘★− 1. □
Claim 6.1.1.2. 𝑚+𝑘★+ 1≥C (ℎ)−C(𝑝).
Proof. As shown in the previous claim,C(𝑝)⊂C (ℎ). It follows
by elementary set logic thatC(ℎ)−C(𝑝) =C(ℎ)\C(𝑝) =C(ℎ)\
𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑝) =C(ℎ)∩𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(𝑝)+C(ℎ)∩𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑝)≤𝑘★+ 1+𝑚;
where the last transition is from𝑘★-cluster anticone bound. □
Using the above definitions and the contradiction hypothesis we
have𝑣≥C (𝑝)⟨d−C(𝑝)⟨d andℓ <C(ℎ)⟨d−C(ℎ)⟨d. Negating
the first inequality and summing the expressions we obtain
C(ℎ)⟨d−C(𝑝)⟨d >ℓ−𝑣+C(ℎ)⟨d−C(𝑝)⟨d.
Applying Claims 6.1.1.1, 6.1.1.2 on both sides we get that𝑚+𝑘★+1 >
ℓ−𝑣+𝑣+𝑢−ℓ−𝑘★− 1 =𝑢−𝑘★− 1, which translates to the desired
result:𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑝)∩C(ℎ)+ 2𝑘★+ 2≥ 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑝)\C(ℎ).
□
For a non-chain block 𝑏 ∈ C(ℎ)⟨d\𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(ℎ), denote 𝑝 =
max𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(ℎ)⟨d∩𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑏). Plugging 𝐵1 = ℎ,𝐵𝑛 = 𝑝,𝐵 = 𝑏 into
Lemma 3 we get that 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑏)∩C (ℎ)+ 2𝑘★ ≥ 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑝)∩
C(ℎ). Combining with Claim 6.1.1 we conclude that𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑏)∩
C(ℎ)+ 4𝑘★+ 2≥ 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑝)∩C (ℎ)+ 2𝑘★+ 2≥ 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑝)\
C(ℎ) > 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑏)\C(ℎ); where that last inequality follows from
𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑝)⊃ 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑏).
It remains to prove the bound for blocks before and during the
start of the burst. For a block 𝑏 ∈C (ℎ)s⟩, we have from event-
sequenceE𝑡,𝑍 that𝑎𝑑𝑣(s)≤𝐶0, thus by definition𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑏)s⟩∩
14
The DAG KNIGHT Protocol: A Parameterless Generalization of Nakamoto Consensus
C(ℎ)+𝐶0≥ 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑏)s⟩\C(ℎ). Additionally, by construction of
the burst event,𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑏)⟨s,d⟩∩C(ℎ) =𝐶0+𝑍 > 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑏)⟨s,d⟩\
C(ℎ) = 0. Finally, since after(ℎ) <C(ℎ)⟨d−C(ℎ)⟨d, it follows
that𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑏)⟨d∩C(ℎ)≥ 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑏)⟨d\C(ℎ). Summing over all
time periods we get that 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑏)∩C(ℎ)≥ 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑏)\C(ℎ),
as claimed.
For blocks𝑏∈C (ℎ)⟨s,d⟩, similar arguments hold. □
Claim 6.2. ∀𝑞∈ 𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(ℎ)∩A,∀𝑘≤ 𝑍−5𝑘★
4 ,C𝑘(𝑞) is not a
𝑍−5𝑘★
4 -UMC of C\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑞).
Proof. We seek to show the existence of a weak block inC𝑘(𝑞)
which has negative score greater than 𝑍−5𝑘★
4 , thus disobeying the
UMC requirement. We show this over a maximal pre-burst block
in the intersectionC(ℎ)∩C𝑘(𝑞).
We begin by showing that the attacker cannot effectively freeload
following the burst event. To that end, we show in the following
claim thatC𝑘(𝑞)⟨e is bounded in size by the number of blocks out
ofC(ℎ)⟨e.
Claim 6.2.1. C𝑘(𝑞)⟨e≤𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞)⟨e\C(ℎ)⟨e.
Proof. First, in the simple case whereC𝑘(𝑞)⟨e∩C(ℎ)⟨e =∅
the proof is immediate sinceC𝑘(𝑞)⟨e⊆𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞)⟨e\C(ℎ)⟨e.
For the more complex case, whereC𝑘(𝑞)⟨e∩C(ℎ)⟨e ≠∅, we
define a counting process and reach the desired result using the
bound𝑘≤ 𝑍−5𝑘★
4 .
Define a sequence of chain blocks 𝑞 = 𝑞0,...,𝑞 𝑛 ∈A in the
following way:
• Denote Δ𝑖−1 BC(ℎ)∩C𝑘(𝑞)∩𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑡(𝑞𝑖−1)
• Given𝑞𝑖−1, if Δ𝑖−1 ≠∅, select𝑞𝑖 to be max𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(𝑞𝑖−1)∩
𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(Δ𝑖−1).
• Otherwise if Δ𝑖−1 =∅, select𝑞𝑖 to be max𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(𝑞𝑖−1) s.t.
C(ℎ)∩C𝑘(𝑞)∩𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑡(𝑞𝑖) ≠∅ if such a block exists, or
max𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(𝑞𝑖−1)∩ before(𝜙) otherwise.
• If𝑞𝑖∈ before(𝜙), halt the process and set𝑛 =𝑖.
It is true by construction that ⁄—𝑛
𝑖=1𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞𝑖−1)⟨e\𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞𝑖)⟨e is
a partitioning of𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞)⟨e. It thus remains to show that for each
partition𝑖,C𝑘(𝑞)∩𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞𝑖−1)\𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞𝑖)≤𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞𝑖−1)\𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞𝑖)\
C(ℎ).
For the first case where Δ𝑖−1 ≠∅, let𝑏 be any element of Δ𝑖−1.
Plugging 𝐵1 = 𝑞𝑖−1,𝐵𝑛 = 𝑞𝑖,𝐵 = 𝑏 into Lemma 2 we get that
C𝑘(𝑞)∩𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞𝑖−1)\𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞𝑖)≤ 4𝑘≤𝑍− 5𝑘★. Additionally, it can
be shown (from minimality ofℎ,𝑎 and from block-race condition)
that𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞𝑖−1)∩after(𝑏)\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑏)≥𝑍−4𝑘★, thus𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞𝑖−1)\
𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞𝑖)\C (ℎ) ≥ 𝑍− 5𝑘★. Combined, C𝑘(𝑞)∩𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞𝑖−1)\
𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞𝑖)≤𝑍− 5𝑘★≤𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞𝑖−1)\𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞𝑖)\C(ℎ), as claimed.
In the second case where Δ𝑖−1 =∅, the result is immediate since
by constructionC𝑘(𝑞)∩𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞𝑖−1)\𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞𝑖) ⊆ 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞𝑖−1)\
𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞𝑖)\C(ℎ).
□
We proceed by using the above to show thatC𝑘(𝑞) has smaller
than𝑍 advantage within post-burst blocks.
Claim 6.2.2. C𝑘(𝑞)⟨e <𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)⟨e\C𝑘(𝑞)\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑞)+𝑍 .
Proof. Recall that after(ℎ)\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (ℎ) <𝑍+C(ℎ)⟨e−C(ℎ)⟨e.
Reorganizing terms we obtain thatafter(ℎ)\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (ℎ)+C(ℎ)⟨e <
𝑍+C(ℎ)⟨e; noting that by definition𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)⟨e\C(ℎ)\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (ℎ) =
C(ℎ)⟨e+ after(ℎ)\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (ℎ) we derive that𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)⟨e\C(ℎ)\
𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (ℎ) <C(ℎ)⟨e+𝑍.
Define𝑚 B C(ℎ)⟨e,𝑢 B 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)⟨e\C (ℎ)\ 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (ℎ)\
𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑞) and𝑣 BC𝑘(𝑞)⟨e. We get that𝑢≤𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)⟨e\C(ℎ)\
𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (ℎ) <C(ℎ)⟨e+𝑍 =𝑚+𝑍. Adding𝑢 to both sides we have
2𝑢 <𝑚+𝑢+𝑍≤𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)⟨e\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑞)+𝑍.
From Claim 6.2.1 we have thatC𝑘(𝑞)⟨e≤ 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞)⟨e\C(ℎ)⟨e.
Noting that 𝑣 =C𝑘(𝑞)⟨e ≤ 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑞)⟨e\C (ℎ)⟨e ⊂ 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)⟨e\
C(ℎ)\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (ℎ)\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑞) =𝑢, we get that𝑣≤𝑢. Thus 2𝑣 <
𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)⟨e\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑞)+𝑍. Reorganizing terms and noting that𝑣⊂
𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)⟨e\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑞), we conclude thatC𝑘(𝑞)⟨e < 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)⟨e\
C𝑘(𝑞)\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑞)+𝑍, as claimed. □
To complete the argument, we determine the attacker’s weak
block. Let 𝑤 B maxC(ℎ)𝜙⟩∩C 𝑘(𝑞)𝜙⟩ (this intersection is
not empty as it contains 𝑔). If 𝑤 ∈ after(s), then 𝑤 ∈ B, so
from maximality and burst structure 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑤)𝜙⟩∩C 𝑘(𝑞)−
𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑤)𝜙⟩\C𝑘(𝑞) ≤ 0. Otherwise, 𝑤 ∈ before(s). We have
from event-sequenceE𝑡,𝑍 that𝑎𝑑𝑣(s) ≤ 𝐶0, thus by definition
𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑤)s⟩∩C(ℎ)+𝐶0≥ 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑤)s⟩\C(ℎ). From maximality,
we have that𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑤)s⟩∩C(ℎ) and𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑤)s⟩∩C𝑘(𝑞) are dis-
joint, thus𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑤)s⟩\C𝑘(𝑞)+𝐶0≥ 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑤)s⟩∩C(ℎ)+𝐶0≥
𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑤)s⟩\C(ℎ)≥ 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑤)s⟩∩C𝑘(𝑞). Noticing (again, by
maximality) that all 𝐶0 blocks ofB⟨s,𝜙⟩ are not inC𝑘(𝑞) we obtain
that𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑤)𝜙⟩∩C𝑘(𝑞)−𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑤)𝜙⟩\C𝑘(𝑞)≤𝐶0−𝐶0 = 0.
Since𝑞∈A we have from Claim 5 thatC𝑘(𝑞)∩B⟨𝜙≤ 2𝑘≤
𝑍−5𝑘★
2 . Noting that the remainder of the burst is not in C𝑘(𝑞)
we get that𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑤)⟨𝜙,e⟩∩C𝑘(𝑞)−𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑤)⟨𝜙,e⟩\C𝑘(𝑞)≤
−3𝑍+𝑍− 5𝑘★≤− 2𝑍.
Using Claim 6.2.2 and summing over all time periods we get
𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑤)∩C𝑘(𝑞)−𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝑤)\C𝑘(𝑞) <−𝑍 <−𝑍−5𝑘★
4 , as we
need. □
To conclude , it remains to set𝑍 large enough s.t. 4𝑘★≤ 𝑍−5𝑘★
4
and thus∀𝑞∈𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(ℎ)∩A,𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)(ℎ) <𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)(𝑞).
Recall that 𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (ℎ)∩ 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)∩A = ∅, so by definition
𝑡 ∈ 𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑠(P\A ), thus 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)(P\A ) ≤ 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)(ℎ).
On the other hand, for any P𝑖 disagreeing withP\A , it holds
that 𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑠(P𝑖) ⊆ 𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑒(ℎ)∩A , thus 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)(P𝑖) >
𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)(ℎ), contradicting𝑎∈A , since𝑎 must select a chain
parent fromP\A . □
As stated earlier, the above proof relies on some simplifying
assumptions. We now set out to show how it can be generalized to
the actual colouring algorithm. We first deal with the case where the
recursive call withinK-Colouring has never setfree_search =𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒 .
This means that∀𝑎∈A ,𝑘 -chain(𝑎)⟨d⊂A , thus all inequalities
in the above proof trivially hold.
The more challenging case is the one where a recursive call
to K-Colouring switches to free_search =𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒 (line 10), hence by
that allowing the attacker to “inherit” the honest colouring. Observe
that this can only happen if𝑘 >𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝐺(𝐶), thus implicitly forcing
15
Michael Sutton and Yonatan Sompolinsky
a rank increase. The following extended argument captures exactly
this property:
Claim 7. (generalized main claim) Conditioned on the occurrence
of event-sequenceE𝑡,𝑍 , it holds that for any ℎ∈H𝑐\A , and for any
𝑎∈A mergingℎ,
𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)∩ after(ℎ)\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (ℎ)
≥C (ℎ)⟨d−C(ℎ)⟨d
+ max  0, 4𝑘★−𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝐺(𝑎) ·𝑍.
(1)
A full proof of this claim will appear in a future version of the
paper.
To conclude the proof of Theorem 2, the following Corollary
shows that, indeed, following event-sequence E𝑡,𝑍 , the attacker
can never regain an advantage:
Corollary 8. Conditioned on the occurrence of event-sequence E𝑡,𝑍 ,
the attacker cannot reorg below the burst event. More formally, ∀𝑠≥
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(e),𝜙 ∈𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑠). 17
Proof. All sets within the current proof are implicitly inter-
sected with after(e).
We first observe that at the starting point, i.e., at time 𝑠 =
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(e), it holds by construction of the burst event that 𝜙 ∈
𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑠). Assume for contradiction there exists a minimal
time𝑠 >𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(e) s.t.𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑠∈A .
We will use the properties of the event-sequence (specifically,
block race win and the initial burst advantage) to provide an upper
bound on𝐺𝑠−1 and a lower bound on𝐺𝑠, and arrive at a contradic-
tion.
From minimality of 𝑠, there exists a block ℎ ∈ H𝑐\A s.t.
𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑠−1 ⇒ ℎ. Additionally, from block-race win we have that
C(𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑠−1) ≥ C(𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑠−1), thus 2C(𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑠−1) ≥ 𝐺𝑠−1,
which leads to 2C(ℎ)+ 2𝑘★≥𝐺𝑠−1
On the other hand, at time𝑠, let𝑎∈A be the merging block of
ℎ (be it any𝑎∈𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑛(𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑠) or𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑠 itself), then by Claim 6
it holds that𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡(𝑎)∩ after(ℎ)\𝑓𝑢𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 (ℎ)≥𝑍+C(ℎ)−C(ℎ).
It follows that𝐺𝑠≥𝐺𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒(ℎ)+C(ℎ)−C(ℎ)+𝑍 =C(ℎ)+C(ℎ)+
C(ℎ)−C(ℎ)+𝑍 = 2C(ℎ)+𝑍.
Combined, we get that 2C(ℎ)+ 2𝑘★≥𝐺𝑠−1 =𝐺𝑠− 1≥ 2C(ℎ)+
𝑍− 1, which yields 2𝑘★≥𝑍− 1, a contradiction. □
17Equivalently:H𝑐∩A =∅.
16