HotPoW: Finality from Proof-of-Work Quorums
Patrik Keller
University of Innsbruck
patrik.keller@uibk.ac.at
Rainer Böhme
University of Innsbruck
rainer.boehme@uibk.ac.at
Abstract
A fundamental conﬂict of many proof-of-work systems is
that they want to achieve inclusiveness and security at the
same time. We analyze and resolve this conﬂict with a theory
of proof-of-work quorums, which enables a new bridge be-
tween Byzantine and Nakamoto consensus. The theory yields
stochastic uniqueness of quorums as a function of a secu-
rity parameter. We employ the theory in HotPoW, a scalable
permissionless distributed log protocol that supports ﬁnality
based on the pipelined three-phase commit previously pre-
sented for HotStuff [65]. We evaluate HotPoW and variants
with adversarial modiﬁcations by simulation. Results show
that the protocol can tolerate network latency, churn, and tar-
geted attacks on consistency and liveness with a small storage
overhead compared to plain Nakamoto consensus and less
complexity than protocols that rely on sidechains for ﬁnality.
1 Introduction
Bitcoin surprised scholars in distributed systems, as well as
in security [11]. Authors have called the new composition of
known concepts a “sweet spot” [64] in the design space for
protocols, and praised the complex way the components are
put together as a “true leap of insight” [49] of Nakamoto [48].
Likely the most intriguing part is the way Bitcoin uses proof-
of-work puzzles to secure a distributed log.
The role of proof-of-work in Nakamoto consensus can
be contemplated in several ways. First and most intuitively,
the computational puzzles can be interpreted as a rate limit
on new identities, which discourage Sybil attacks [ 19] in a
lottery for blocks and new coins. Second, proof-of-work can
be conceived as a game-proof variant of a probabilistic back-
off mechanism, as used in media access control in computer
networks. It reduces the risk of collisions when many nodes
concurrently seek write access to a shared medium, the ledger.
Proof-of-work has been formalized in cryptographic security
models of Nakamoto consensus [27, 55]. However, we are not
aware of work pointing out the fundamental conﬂict between
inclusiveness and security inherent to the way proof-of-work
is used in the known distributed log protocols.
This conﬂict precludes reliable and fast commits. Arguably,
it is the reason why practical protocols trade ﬁnality for even-
tual consistency. But the lack of ﬁnality limits the applicability
for high-value transactions [10, 29], a potential show-stopper
discussed even beyond the technical community [4, 12].
We tackle this conﬂict directly, leading to a theory of proof-
of-work quorums, which enables new ways of using proof-of-
work in permissionless distributed log protocols. We propose
one such protocol, HotPoW, demonstrating that ﬁnality with
reliable and short time to commit is possible. Speciﬁcally,
we do not rely on sidechains, a tool used in the literature to
stack Byzantine on top of Nakamoto consensus [41, 53, 54].
Sidechains can add ﬁnality and increase throughput at the
price of increased complexity, overhead, and tricky issues in
the synchronization between layers [23, 41].
The proposed protocol is inspired by two recent break-
throughs: Bobtail [9] and HotStuff [65]. The former optimizes
stochastic properties of the block delay in Nakamoto consen-
sus. The latter adapts principles of Byzantine fault tolerance
to blockchains in a clever way. It has received attention after
Facebook’s announcement to use it in LibraBFT [8].
We make the following contributions:
1. We draw attention to a fundamental conﬂict between
inclusiveness and security in Nakamoto consensus and
propose a principled resolution (Section 2).
2. We develop a theory of proof-of-work quorums where
quorums are formed over votes generated by stochastic
processes. We show that sufﬁciently large quorums are
practically unique (Section 3).
3. We propose HotPoW, a protocol that ﬁnds consensus
over a distributed log without requiring pre-deﬁned iden-
tities. HotPoW scales at least as well as practical block-
chain protocols and much better than Byzantine fault
tolerance protocols. It relies on proof-of-work, but, un-
like deployed systems using the longest chain rule, our
1
arXiv:1907.13531v3  [cs.CR]  21 Feb 2020
0 ˆt1
0
majority
minority
(a) Fair inclusion of minorities.
0 ˆt2
0
majority
minority
(b) Security margin against attacking minorities.
Figure 1: Probability densities of exponential (left) and gamma distributions (right) as functions over time for a 2/3 majority and
a 1/3 minority (with ﬂipped y-axis). The area under each curve represents the odds of winning a race.
construction supports a three-phase commit logic. State
updates (transactions) are ﬁnal after a predictable amount
of time, and the probability of inconsistency is bounded
according to our theory (Section 4).
4. We simulate executions of HotPoW as well as of variants
with adversarial modiﬁcations. The results show that the
protocol can tolerate network latency, churn, and targeted
attacks on consistency and liveness at small overhead
compared to the best deployed systems (Section 5).
Section 6 compares HotPoW to related works and discusses
its limitations. Section 7 concludes. For replicability and
future research, we make the protocol implementation and
the simulation code available online.1
2 Intuition
The key conﬂict between inclusiveness and security faced by
cryptocurrencies is as follows: minorities should be encour-
aged to participate (inclusiveness), but they should not be
able to make decisions alone (security). Nakamoto consensus
achieves inclusiveness by sacriﬁcing security for an uncertain
period of time (eventual consistency). This becomes problem-
atic when irreversible real-world actions are taken based on
unsettled transactions in the distributed log (double spending).
A short and reliable time to commit would mitigate this risk.
Recall that Nakamoto consensus prioritizes inclusiveness
by using a puzzle as gatekeeper to participation. The protocol
speciﬁes a repeated race for the ﬁrst puzzle solution. Each win-
ner proposes a state update and receives some reward. Most
cryptocurrencies use puzzles—moderately hard functions—
for which iterative trial and error is the best known solving
algorithm. Such puzzles imply exponentially distributed solv-
ing time. Figure 1a shows the probability distributions for the
solving times of a 2/3 majority of solving power compared
to a 1/3 minority. The expected time of the end of the race
is marked with ˆt1 (in Bitcoin ˆt1≈ 10 minutes). Consequently,
1https://github.com/pkel/hotpow/tree/arxiv_v3
the area under each curve represents the odds of winning the
race. Observe that the minority has a fair chance. This makes
the protocol inclusive, but also implies that minorities have
a signiﬁcant chance of directly writing state updates. For im-
proved security, we would prefer a distribution such that the
minority’s area under the curve is small (ideally negligible),
as displayed in Figure 1b.
Since the puzzle of Nakamoto consensus behaves like
in Figure 1a, a single state update is not reliable. As a re-
sult, users are recommended to wait for multiple consecutive
blocks before acting upon a payment. The time needed for se-
quentially solving k exponential puzzles is gamma distributed
with shape parameter k. In fact, Figure 1b shows the gamma
distribution for k = 6. Note the signiﬁcant gap between mi-
nority and majority: it is unlikely that a minority can generate
a sequence of 6 state updates before the majority does so. In
this sense, multiple puzzle solutions qualify a majority, while
a single one does not.
In Nakamoto consensus, security comes at the price of
waiting for multiple solutions. Bitcoin’s convention ofk = 6
implies an expected waiting time of ˆt2≈ 60 minutes, which is
arguably too slow for many applications. Besides, Nakamoto
consensus does not give a rationale on how to choose k.
A key idea for resolving this conﬂict is to break the one-to-
one relationship between puzzle solutions and blocks. Instead
of requiring a single10 minute puzzle per block, HotPoW asks
for k easier puzzles each expected to take 10/k minutes. In
other words, HotPoW achieves security by appending puzzle
solutions in parallel rather than sequentially, as illustrated
in Figure 2. Since the puzzles are independent, we end up
with the same block rate but k times the number of solutions.
The expected computational effort stays the same, but we
accumulate a qualifying number of solutions for every block.
This means we get the shape of Figure 1b much faster: ˆt2≈ ˆt1.
For a principled construction of HotPoW, we reduce the
payload “authenticated” [5] by proof-of-work to a minimum:
1. a reference to a recent point in time (e. g., a hash link to
the last seen block)
2
/list✓ /list✓ /list✓ /list✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
/list/list/list/list
Nakamoto
Proposed
Gamma
Exp Exp Exp
Gamma Gamma Gamma/list
✓
state update
solution
reference
Figure 2: Sequential puzzles in Nakamoto consensus imply
exponentially distributed block delays. Multiple smaller puz-
zles in parallel lead to a gamma distribution for each block.
2. a reference to an identity (public key or commitment)
A triple of a puzzle solution and these two references forms
a veriﬁable ephemeral identity. The puzzle solution binds
resources in order to prevent Sybil attacks, the reference in
time ensures freshness, and the identiﬁer enables authorized
actions, such as claiming a reward.
The main difference between proof-of-work systems and
the well-studied class of Byzantine fault tolerant (BFT) sys-
tems [14, 20, 44] is that the former do not rely on external
identiﬁcation of the participating nodes. Inspired by the early
work of Aspnes et al.[3], HotPoW uses proof-of-work to boot-
strap ephemeral identities and plugs them into HotStuff [65],
a state of the art blockchain-based BFT system. In HotStuff,
each block carries a certiﬁcate about a qualiﬁed majority of
nodes (quorum) conﬁrming the last seen block. HotStuff’s
proof of ﬁnality is based on the qualifying properties of each
quorum. This motivates us to explore whether and to what ex-
tent a set of proof-of-work solutions can qualify a majority. In
Section 3, we will show that qualifying majorities are possible
within a single block. This allows us to transfer HotStuff’s
ﬁnality to the permissionless setting.
The recurse to HotStuff enables us to ﬁx the number of
blocks to wait before accepting a state update as ﬁnal at the
necessary number of phases to commit, thereby resolving a
drawback of Nakamoto consensus. As illustrated in Figure 3,
HotStuff uses a three-phase commit, which can be pipelined
for subsequent state updates on a blockchain. In a nutshell, the
ﬁrst phase locks a single proposal, the second phase conﬁrms
majority uptake of this lock, and the third phase ensures that
the knowledge of this knowledge is propagated. We refer
to [65] for the rationales and failure modes. In this sense,
HotPoW parallelizes not only puzzle solutions but also the
phases of the commit logic.
Another advantage of the gamma distribution per block
is a reduction in the variance of block delays compared to
the exponential distribution implied by the puzzle. While
Phase 1
Phase 2
Phase 3
commit
Figure 3: Pipelined three-phase commit on a blockchain in
HotStuff and HotPoW.
the commit pipeline gives us ﬁnality after three blocks, the
reduced variance translates this into a reliable time to commit.
The theory in the following section shows formally how all
this is related to the quorum size, HotPoW’s new security
parameter.
3 Proof-of-Work Quorums
Quorums are central to the design and analysis of BFT proto-
cols. The typical Byzantine setting assumes a set ofn = 3 f +1
identiﬁed nodes, of which at most f deviate from the protocol.
A set of 2 f + 1 votes for the same value is called a quorum.
If correct nodes vote at most once, quorums imply a majority
decision and thus are unique. The uniqueness may be violated
in two situations.
BFT-1 More than n nodes vote.
BFT-2 More than f nodes vote more than once.
Practical systems avoid BFT-1 using preset identities for all
nodes and rule out BFT-2 by assumption.
Proof-of-work enables systems where agents can join and
leave at any time without obtaining permission from an iden-
tity provider or gatekeeper [48]. This difference is often im-
plied in the terms “permissioned” and “permissionless”. In
the permissionless case one must distinguish between agents
and nodes. Agents are entities participating in a distributed
system. An agent can operate any number of nodes. Colluding
parties are interpreted as a single agent.
We introduce the notion proof-of-work quorum for a set of
votes where each vote requires a solution to a proof-of-work
puzzle. Since the puzzle solving time is probabilistic, the
uniqueness of quorums cannot be absolute. In contrast to the
Byzantine setting, we have to consider three failure modes:
PoW-1 The total compute power of the network is higher
than assumed.
PoW-2 The adversary controls more than the assumed frac-
tion of compute power.
PoW-3 A random bad realization happens.
3
The failure modes PoW-1 and PoW-2 correspond to the
Byzantine failure modes BFT-1 and BFT-2. Our goal is to
understand the new failure mode PoW-3 and how it affects
the potential ambiguity (violation of uniqueness) of quorums.
Deﬁnition 1 (Proof-of-work process). A proof-of-work pro-
cess is a stochastic count process where each event assigns
one ability to vote (ATV) to one agent. Each ATV can be used
by the agent it is assigned to, to vote once for one value.
We adopt the notion of a quorum from the BFT litera-
ture [45, 65] except that we will apply it to votes from ATVs
rather than identiﬁed nodes.
Deﬁnition 2 (k-quorum). A set ofk votes for the same valuex
is called a k-quorum for x.
Observing a k-quorum implies that at least k ATVs have
been used, hence the proof-of-work process must have as-
signed at least k ATVs. This connects to time.
Deﬁnition 3 (Optimistic quorum time). The time at which
the proof-of-work process assigns the k-th ATV is called
optimistic k-quorum time. For a proof-of-work process P and
quorum size k it is formally deﬁned by the random variable
TP,k := inf{t∈ R≥0| P(t)≥ k} .
TP,k is the earliest point in time at which a k-quorum is
feasible. A k-quorum is only possible at exactly TP,k, if all
assigned ATVs are used to vote for the same value.
A quorum for x is ambiguous if there is another quorum
for y⁄= x. Since each ATV can be used for at most one value,
ambiguous k-quorums are only possible when the proof-of-
work process has assigned at least 2k ATVs.
Deﬁnition 4 (Probability of ambiguity). For a proof-of-work
process P and quorum size k we deﬁne the probability of
ambiguity (POA) as
poaP,k(t) := Pr
[
P(t)≥ 2k
]
.
For puzzles where the best known solving algorithm is in-
dependent trial and error, the stochastic process is instantiated
by the Poisson process Pλ. This is because if each puzzle
solution generates one ATV , the time between consecutive
ATVs is exponentially distributed with rate λ.
Lemma 1. The POA for the Poisson process Pλ is given by
poaPλ,k(t) = 1− e−λt
2k−1
∑
i=0
(λt)i
i! .
Proof. See Appendix A.
Lemma 2. The optimistic k-quorum time for the Poisson
process is Erlang distributed with shape parameterk and rate
parameter λ, in short
TPλ,k∼ Erlang(k, λ) .
0 10 20 30 40
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
density of TPλ,k k
1
2
16
¯tλ,k
Figure 4: The density of the distribution of the optimistic
k-quorum time based on Pλ with rate λ = k/10 (minutes).
0 10 20 30 40
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
poaPλ,k(t)
k
1
2
16
¯tλ,k
Figure 5: The probability of ambiguity as a function of time
for quorum sizes k = 1,2, and 16 and λ = k/10 (minutes).
Proof. See Appendix A.
Corollary 1. The expected optimistic k-quorum time for the
Poisson process is
¯tλ,k := Ev
[
TPλ,k
]
= k/λ .
Proof. The statement follows from Lemma 2 and the deﬁni-
tion of the Erlang distribution [63, p. 146].
Figure 4 illustrates the distribution of the optimistic k-
quorum time for k∈{ 1,2,16} based on the Poisson process.
In order to compare quorum sizes greater than one to an ideal
Bitcoin (k = 1, ¯tλ,k = 10 minutes), we choose λ = k/10.
Figure 5 shows the POA for different quorum sizes as
a function of time. Again, we adjust the rate such that the
expected optimistic k-quorum time is 10 minutes. Observe
that the POA increases over time as the number of ATVs
grows. More importantly, the POA at the expected optimistic
quorum time decreases in the quorum size k.
In order to isolate the effect of k, we evaluate the POA at
ﬁxed time ¯tλ,k, which lends itself to a closed form.
Corollary 2. For the Poisson process, the POA at expected
optimistic k-quorum time is given by
poaPλ,k(¯tλ,k) = 1− e−k
2k−1
∑
i=0
ki
i! .
Proof. By inserting Corollary 1 into Lemma 1.
4
Observe that the POA at expected optimistic quorum time
is independent of λ. This is useful as λ may measure the total
compute capacity in proof-of-work networks, which is not
necessarily known to each agent.
Since ambiguity causes failure, and the probability of am-
biguity vanishes as k grows, k becomes a security parameter.
In order to relate it to other security parameters, such as the
key size, we adopt the common deﬁnition of negligibility
from cryptography (i. e., asymptotic decline faster than any
polynomial) and state the following theorem.
Theorem 1. For the Poisson process, the probability of ambi-
guity at the expected quorum time is negligible in the quorum
size k.
Proof. See Appendix A.
Remark (Validation on Bitcoin) . For Bitcoin parameters
(k = 1, λ = 0.1), the POA at ¯tλ,k is p = 0.2642. This part
of the theory can be validated on historical data. We esti-
mate the expected block delay by averaging the differences
between consecutive block time stamps over 2017–2018. 2
The estimated average block delay is ˆt = 9.52 minutes. The
ratio of cases with more than two blocks arriving within ˆt is
ˆp = 0.2606. This estimate should be slightly below p because
our historic data does not contain orphaned blocks. Since
p≈ ˆp, we conclude that the theory applies to Bitcoin.
The implication of this theory for protocol design is that
larger quorums reduce the probability of ambiguity. The
(close to) exponential decay makes it conceivable to choose
parameters such that quorums are practically unique. This al-
lows us to use a notion of quorum uniqueness with ephemeral
identities generated by proof-of-work.
4 HotPoW
Now we specify HotPoW, a distributed log protocol secured
by a proof-of-work process (Def. 1) and k-quorums (Def. 2).
We present HotPoW using pseudocode and a mixture of
event-driven and imperative programming. A less ambiguous
implementation in OCaml is provided online.3
4.1 Prerequisites
We assume interfaces to the network and application layers
(Fig. 6), and the availability of cryptographic primitives.
4.1.1 Broadcast Network The proposed protocol requires
a (potentially unreliable) network broadcast. We abstract from
the exact implementation and assume that scheduling an event
⟨ send| m⟩ results in the message m being sent to (most of)
2We choose this time range because the block time stamps were less
accurate in the more distant past as the data ﬁeld was used for other purposes.
3https://github.com/pkel/hotpow/tree/arxiv_v3
Work Broadcast network
HotPoW
Application
CHECK UPDATE PROPOSE UPDATE APPLY UPDATE
⟨ atv| .⟩ ⟨ send| .⟩ ⟨ receive| .⟩
Figure 6: Interaction between the protocol (HotPoW), the ap-
plication, the proof-of-work process, and the network. Arrows
denote information ﬂows and not necessarily call directions.
the other HotPoW nodes. On the receiving side, the imple-
mentation delivers message m′ by scheduling⟨ receive| m′⟩.
4.1.2 Application HotPoW implements a distributed log
which may serve as a base for different applications [ 1, 43,
60]. For example, a simple cryptocurrency could append lists
of transactions which jointly form a ledger. More advanced
applications could add scalability layers that only record key
decisions in the distributed log while handling other state
updates separately [23, 41, 54].
We abstract from the application logic using three proce-
dures HotPoW can call. CHECK UPDATE takes an application
state and a state update as arguments and returns true if the
state update is valid. APPLY UPDATE takes an application state
and a state update and returns an updated state. PROPOSE -
UPDATE takes an application state and returns a valid state
update. We are agnostic about direct access of the application
to the broadcast network. For example, cryptocurrencies share
transactions provisionally before they are logged in blocks.
4.1.3 Cryptography HotPoW uses cryptographic hash
functions for the hash-linked list and the proof-of-work pro-
cess. We separate these two concerns and use two differ-
ent hash functions, Hlist and Hpow. While it is sufﬁcient
that Hlist is cryptographically secure, HotPoW requires the
same stronger assumptions for Hpow as Bitcoin [ 1]. Since
this difference is not central, the reader can safely assume
Hlist = Hpow = SHA3.
HotPoW also requires a digital signature scheme [ 39,
Def. 12.1, p. 442]. We assume a secure implementation
is given by the three procedures GENERATE KEYPAIR,
CHECK SIGNATURE , and SIGN . Every node holds an asym-
metric key pair (me, secret).
4.2 Protocol
4.2.1 Local Block Store HotPoW nodes maintain a local
tree of hash-linked blocks and a reference to the preferred
chain (head). They store blocks together with the associated
5
application state, the block height, and a set of corresponding
votes (see Listing 4.1). The block storage is indexed by Hlist.
Listing 4.1 Local Block Store
1: procedure STORE (block B)
2: h← Hlist(B)
3: if h⁄∈ blocks then
4: parent← blocks[B.parent]
5: blocks[h].parent← parent
6: blocks[h].state← APPLY UPDATE(parent.state, B.payload)
7: blocks[h].height← parent.height + 1
8: blocks[h].votes← /0
9: blocks[h].block← B
10: UPDATE HEAD(h)
4.2.2 Votes As mentioned in Section 2, a vote in HotPoW
is a triple (r, p,s), where r is a reference to a previous block,
p is the public key of the voter, and s is a puzzle solution. A
vote (r, p,s) is valid if Hpow(r, p,s)≤ tv, where tv denotes the
proof-of-work threshold and represents HotPoW’s difﬁculty
parameter. HotPoW nodes maintain a set of valid votes for
each block. The procedureCOLLECT (Listing 4.2) adds a valid
vote (r, p,s) to the block referenced by r and, if necessary,
updates the preferred chain (see Sect. 4.2.9 below).
Listing 4.2 Collection of V otes
11: procedure COLLECT (r, p,s)
12: if Hpow(r, p,s)≤ tv then
13: blocks[r].votes← blocks[r].votes∪{(p, s)}
14: UPDATE HEAD(r)
4.2.3 Quorums As deﬁned in Section 3, a k-quorum is a set
of k votes for the same reference. We represent such quorums
as lists. Since the reference is the same for all votes, we omit it
from the list. A list L ={(pi,si)} represents a valid k-quorum
for r, if the following conditions hold:
1.|L| = k
2.∀1≤ i≤ k : Hpow(r, pi,si)≤ tv
3.∀1≤ i < k : Hpow(r, pi,si)≤ Hpow(r, pi+1,si+1)
The ﬁrst condition enforces the quorum size. The second
condition ensures that all votes are valid. The third condition
imposes a canonical order which we use for leader election.
We intentionally allow single nodes providing multiple votes.
Sibyl attacks are mitigated by the scarcity of votes.
4.2.4 Leader Election A quorum can only be formed at
optimistic quorum time (Def. 3) if all nodes vote for the same
block. We facilitate coordination by electing a leader who
is responsible for proposing a new block. This election is
based on the proof-of-work quorum: the leader is identiﬁed
by the smallest vote. According to Section 4.2.3 Condition 3,
this vote is also the ﬁrst element of the quorum. Leaders
authenticate their proposals for the next block using SIGN and
their private key. Everyone veriﬁes proposals with the ﬁrst
public key in the quorum.
4.2.5 Blockchain The global data structure of the protocol
is a hash-linked list of blocks. Each block consists of a hash
reference to its predecessor (parent), a proof-of-work quorum
for this predecessor, a payload, and a proof of leadership
(signature). The references to parent blocks are established
by the collision-resistant hash function Hlist. The payload is
a state update to the application implemented on top of the
distributed log (see Sect. 4.1.2).
With quorums, leader election, and state updates deﬁned,
we are in the position to present HotPoW’s block validity rule
in Listing 4.3. The loop iterates over the quorum, counts the
votes, veriﬁes them, and checks their canonical order. The
boolean conjunction in line 22 veriﬁes the remaining condi-
tion of the quorum, leadership, and the validity of the proposed
state update.
Listing 4.3 Block Validity
15: procedure VALID BLOCK (block B)
16: (c,h)← (0,0)
17: for all (p,s) in B.quorum do
18: h′← Hpow(B.parent, p,s) ⊿ predecessor!
19: if h′ > tv then return false ⊿ quorum condition 2, Sect. 4.2.3
20: if h′ < h then return false ⊿ quorum condition 3, Sect. 4.2.3
21: (c,h)← (c + 1,h′)
22: return
c = k∧ ⊿ quorum condition 1, Sect. 4.2.3
CHECK SIGNATURE (B.quorum.[0].p, B)∧
CHECK UPDATE(blocks[B.parent].state, B.payload)
A key difference to Nakamoto consensus is that the proof-
of-work solutions in the quorum are bound to the previous
block and not to the state update of the proposed block (see
line 18). This implements the separation of puzzle solutions
from block proposals and enables parallel puzzle solving (see
Sect. 2).
4.2.6 Proposing Nodes assume leadership whenever possi-
ble. If so, the procedure PROPOSE IFLEADER (Listing 4.4)
obtains a state update from the application, integrates it into a
new valid block, and shares it with the other nodes.
Listing 4.4 Block Proposals
23: procedure PROPOSE IFLEADER (r)
24: if∃ valid k-quorum Q⊂ blocks[r].votes where Q[0].p = me then
25: B.parent← r
26: B.quorum← Q
27: B.payload← PROPOSE UPDATE(blocks[r].state)
28: B.signature← SIGN ((B.parent, B.quorum, B.payload), secret)
29: STORE (B)
30: schedule⟨ send| block B⟩
31: return true
32: else return false
4.2.7 Commit Proposals become ﬁnal after the three-phase
commit. Each subsequent block carries a quorum that com-
pletes one phase, like in HotStuff (see Sect. 2). Consequently,
the most recent application state can be retrieved from the
local block store as shown in Listing 4.5.
6
Listing 4.5 Reading Application State
33: procedure READ STATE
34: return blocks[head].parent.parent.parent.state
4.2.8 Conﬂict Resolution The commit becomes effective
after three blocks, but we have to consider conﬂicting block
proposals at the uncommitted frontier. For example, when
more than k votes exist, the leader election is not unique.
Moreover, a malicious leader can send different proposals
without solving additional proof-of-work puzzles. Nodes re-
solve such conﬂicts based on the progress towards the next
quorum.
4.2.9 Block Preference When learning of a new block or
vote, nodes update their preferred chain according to a modi-
ﬁed version of Nakamoto’s longest chain rule. HotPoW adapts
it to include information on quorum progress (Sect. 4.2.8) and
reject changes to already committed state (Sect. 4.2.7). Pro-
cedure UPDATE HEAD (Listing 4.6) takes a candidate block
reference and updates the preferred chain if necessary.
Listing 4.6 Block Preference
35: procedure UPDATE HEAD(r)
36: H← blocks[head]
37: R← blocks[r]
38: d← R.height− H.height
39: if d > 0∨ (d = 0∧| R.votes| >|H.votes|) then
40: while d > 0 do (R, d)← (R.parent, d− 1)
41: if H.parent.parent.parent.block = R.parent.parent.parent.block then
42: head← r
4.2.10 Main Program Listing 4.7 shows the set of event
handlers that tie everything together and deﬁne a HotPoW
node. The execution is initiated by scheduling the ⟨ init⟩
event. The listing shows how nodes assume leadership upon
completing a suitable quorum with an ATV of their own
(line 50), or votes received from others, either directly (line 54)
or as part of a block proposal (line 58). In the last case, if
more than k votes exist, it can happen that a node replaces
the leader. It proposes a block of its own by reusing votes
contained in the received proposal. This is possible because
votes in HotPoW reference the previous block and not the
current proposal. The possibility of reusing votes reduces
wasted work compared to orphans in Nakamoto consensus, a
problem that has been studied separately [61]. It also provides
robustness against leader failure (see Sect. 5.1.3).
Line 48 handles ATVs. If the node cannot lead a quorum,
it broadcasts the vote. The last missing part is how ATVs can
be scheduled, which we discuss next.
Listing 4.7 The HotPoW Protocol
43: upon⟨ init⟩ do
44: me, secret← GENERATE KEYPAIR( )
45: head← genesis ⊿ hard-coded magic value
46: blocks[genesis].state← S0 ⊿ application’s initial state
47: blocks[genesis].height← 0
48: upon⟨ atv| s⟩ do
49: COLLECT (head, me, s)
50: if not PROPOSE IFLEADER (head) then
51: schedule⟨ send| vote (head, me, s)⟩
52: upon⟨ receive| vote (r, p,s)⟩ do ⊿ sent by other node in line 51
53: COLLECT (r, p,s)
54: PROPOSE IFLEADER (r)
55: upon⟨ receive| block B⟩ do ⊿ sent by other node in line 30 (Sect. 4.2.6)
56: for all (p,s) in B.quorum do
57: COLLECT (B.parent, p, s)
58: PROPOSE IFLEADER (B.parent)
59: if VALID BLOCK (B) then STORE (B)
4.2.11 Work Agents can participate in the quorum ﬁnding
process by computing ATVs on their nodes. For completeness,
Listing 4.8 shows the trial-and-error algorithm which sched-
ules solutions suitable for votes (≤ tv). Alternatively, agents
can search ATVs with the help of other machines, possibly in
parallel and using specialized hardware. Figure 6 reﬂects this
by splitting the lower layer in network and work.
Listing 4.8 Puzzle Solving
60: procedure WORK
61: draw random number n
62: if Hpow(head, me, n)≤ tv then
63: schedule⟨ atv| n⟩
64: WORK
Figure A.1 in the appendix visualizes an execution of Hot-
PoW by correct nodes and compares it to Nakamoto consen-
sus.
4.3 Incentives
It is possible to motivate participation in HotPoW by reward-
ing puzzle solutions. This requires some kind of virtual asset
that (at least partly) fulﬁlls the functions of money [34, p. 1]
and can be transferred to a vote’s public key. Claiming the
reward for (r, p,s) depends on the corresponding secret key.
HotPoW could adopt Bobtails’s constant reward per vote
[9]. Rewarding votes instead of blocks would ensure inclu-
siveness without compromising security (see Sect. 2). V otes
occur k times more frequently than blocks. HotPoW’s min-
ing income would thus be less volatile than in Nakamoto
consensus. This reduces the pressure to form mining pools.
However, it is not trivial to establish if constant rewards are
incentive compatible because the utility of the reward outside
the system may affect the willingness to participate in the sys-
tem and thereby make λ endogenous [18, 56]. This implies
that rewards must be treated jointly with the assumptions pre-
venting the failure modes PoW-1 and PoW-2. We are unaware
of protocol analyses that solve this problem convincingly.
7
priority queue
ti≤ ti+1
t0
t1
t2
t3
tn+1
tn+2
⟨ atv⟩
⟨ broadcast| m⟩
⟨ deliver| m,n− 1⟩
⟨ deliver| m,n− 2⟩
⟨ deliver| m,0⟩
⟨ atv⟩
simulation honest nodes
⟨ atv⟩
⟨ receive| m⟩
⟨ send| m⟩
attacker node
⟨ atv⟩
⟨ receive| m⟩
⟨ send| m′⟩
random assignment
random assignment
model latency,
churn, and failure
schedule event
Figure 7: Schematic overview of the discrete event simulation.
On a more general note, designing protocols like economic
mechanisms by incentivizing desired behavior sounds attrac-
tive because there is some hope that the assumption of honest
nodes can be replaced by a somewhat weaker assumption of
rational agents [26, 31]. In this spirit, Badertscher et al. [6]
present positive results for Bitcoin in a discrete round exe-
cution model and under assumption of a constant exchange
rate. However, many roadblocks remain. Agents’ actions are
not fully observable (e. g., information withholding) and pref-
erence orders are not fully knowable, hence rationality is
not precisely deﬁned. Side-payments (bribes), which cannot
be ruled out, pose an insurmountable challenge for mecha-
nism design [10, 12, 37]. For distributed logs, which work
inherently sequential, this approach may even be thwarted
by negative results on the existence of unique equilibria in
repeated games [24]. For these reasons, we skip the mecha-
nism design aspects and limit our contribution to transferring
Byzantine consensus to proof-of-work scenarios. In other
words, HotPoW supports incentives for inclusiveness, but its
security intentionally does not rely on incentives.
5 Evaluation
We implement HotPoW in OCaml and evaluate it in a network
of 1000 nodes using a discrete event simulation. We average
over 100 independent executions of the ﬁrst 500 blocks. All
results are reproducible with the code provided online.4
The simulation maintains state for all simulated nodes sep-
arately. Events are stored in a priority queue, with keys rep-
resenting points in time. Events are scheduled by inserting
them into the queue. There are three types of simulation
events:⟨ atv⟩,⟨ broadcast⟩ and⟨ deliver⟩. The simulation’s
main loop takes the ﬁrst event from the queue and handles it
by interacting with the nodes in the following way (also see
Fig. 7).
4https://github.com/pkel/hotpow/tree/arxiv_v3
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
time to commit
latency10−4 10−3 10−2 10−1
60ms 1’
k
2
8
32
128
Figure 8: The effect of latency on the time to commit. The
latency is stated relative to the optimistic quorum time (in
small print for a quorum time of 10’). The horizontal lines
show a realistic scenario (10s for blocks, 100ms for votes).
Proof-of-Work When taking an ⟨ atv⟩ event from the
queue, the simulation randomly and independently assigns
an ATV to a node. The simulation executes the assignment
by invoking the⟨ atv⟩ event handler on the receiving node.
Then, it schedules the next ATV with a random, exponentially
distributed time delta. This simulates a proof-of-work pro-
cess according to Def. 1. The simulation does not perform
actual work by setting the vote threshold tv to the maximum;
meaning puzzles are trivial to solve.
Broadcast Nodes invoke the broadcast logic by scheduling
local⟨ send| .⟩ events. The simulation translates them to
global⟨ broadcast| .⟩ events. For each broadcast event, the
simulation schedules⟨ deliver| .⟩ events for each node except
the sender. During this step, the simulation injects latency
and simulates churn and leader failure. Delivery events are
handled by invoking the⟨ receive| .⟩ handler on the receiving
node.
5.1 Robustness
We evaluate the robustness in terms of latency, churn, and
leader failure. In all simulation runs we check for inconsistent
committed state, which did not occur.
5.1.1 Latency We model the effect of latency by injecting
a random time delay between broadcast send and message de-
livery. We draw delays from an exponential distribution with
ﬁxed expectation, independently for each node and delivery.
Latency causes temporal state inconsistencies. In these peri-
ods, nodes spend their ATVs on extending superseded blocks,
or even produce temporal forks. We observe that largely inde-
pendent of the quorum size k, expected latencies below 1 %
of the expected block time (Bitcoin: 6 seconds) have marginal
impact, while latencies in the order of 10 % of the expected
block time (Bitcoin: 60 seconds) delay the commit by about
20 %. Figure 8 visualizes these results.
8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
time to commit
0 0.1 0.4 0.5churn ratio
k
2
8
32
128
Figure 9: The effect of churn on the time to commit.
Empirical measurements [15, 16, 29] suggest that the prop-
agation time of Bitcoin blocks (≈ 500 KB) is about 9 seconds
on the Internet. If we take this as an upper bound, we can ar-
gue that HotPoW tolerates practical latencies. Moreover, most
of HotPoW’s messages are votes. They are multiple orders
of magnitude smaller (72 B; see Sect. 5.3), ﬁt into a single
packet, and are much easier to verify than Bitcoin blocks. Re-
sults of a simulation with different latencies for blocks (10s)
and votes (100ms) suggest that HotPoW can run at Internet
scale with lower expected block time than 10 minutes.
5.1.2 Churn We simulate churn by muting a fraction (churn
ratio) of random nodes for 10 times the expected block time.
Muted nodes can receive ATVs but do not send or receive
messages. Accordingly, the ATVs assigned to muted nodes
represent lost work. We expect that the time to commit is
inversely proportional to the churn ratio: if 50 % of the nodes
are muted, the time to commit is twice as long, independent
of the quorum size. Figure 9 supports this claim.
5.1.3 Leader Failure Leaders may fail to propose blocks.
We model such failures by dropping block proposals randomly
with constant probability (leader failure rate).
In Nakamoto consensus, lost proposals imply a full block
worth of wasted work. HotPoW can reuse votes for different
proposals. Honest nodes reveal at most one new vote with
their proposal. Accordingly, a lost proposal wastes at most
the work of one vote. Therefore, with increasing quorum size
the robustness to leader failure should improve. The results in
Figure 10 (with realistic 10s/100ms latency) and Figure A.2
(without latency to isolate effects) support this claim. For
perspective, the right end of the graph simulates a situation
where an attacker can monitor all nodes’ network trafﬁc and
disconnect nodes at discretion with 50 % success probability.
Still, for large quorum sizes the time to commit is not longer
than under the extreme latencies discussed in Section 5.1.1.
The robustness against churn and leader failure emerges
from HotPoW’s novel approach to form short-lived commit-
tees from ephemeral identities. This maintains liveness even
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
time to commit
0 0.1 0.4 0.5leader failure rate
k
2
8
32
128
Figure 10: The effect of leader failure on the time to commit.
under the threat of powerful network-level attacks. We move
on to the discussion of attacks on the protocol layer.
5.2 Security
The security evaluation draws on the framework by Zhang
and Preneel [66]. It distinguishes the security aspects proof-
of-work blockchains should fulﬁll: chain quality, incentive
compatibility, subversion gain, and censorship susceptibility.
The authors suggest Markov Decision Processes (MDP) as
method and apply it to several variants of Nakamoto consen-
sus. However, state explosion prevented them from modeling
Bobtail,5 because it ranks proof-of-work solutions by magni-
tude. Since HotPoW adopts this ranking for the leader elec-
tion (Sect. 4.2.4), it does not seem readily amenable to MDPs,
either. We thus resort to informal reasoning and simulation.
Following the convention in the literature, we assume two
agents. Let λ be the total compute power. The attacker hasα·λ
compute power, the honest agent controls the rest. The honest
agent operates correct nodes, while the attacker operates a
single node that may deviate from the protocol speciﬁcation.
5.2.1 Subversion Gain The canonical example for subver-
sion gain in cryptocurrencies is double spending: the attacker
wants at least one of the honest nodes (the merchant) to act on
inconsistent state. HotPoW supports commits, hence we nei-
ther need to consider the possibility of history rewriting nor
the double spending ofuncommitted transactions.6 Nakamoto
consensus suffers from these problems [2, 12, 29, 33, 38].
The only remaining strategy is splitting the network so
that the recipients of at least two different double-spend trans-
actions commit to different states. This loss of consistency
would materialize in permanent forks that require out-of-band
resolutions (triggered by an else-branch after code line 42).
5Zhang and Preneel [66] were aware of Bobtail and chose not to model it.
This is conﬁrmed in private communication with the authors of Bobtail [9].
6Sound applications on a system with ﬁnality wait until the commit.
HotPoW can be parametrized to acceptable commit times for economic
exchanges between humans. (High-frequency trading needs other architec-
tures.)
9
In order to understand how HotPoW ensures consistency, it
is instructive to recall the block preference rule in Sect. 4.2.9.
Assume counterfactually that nodes never update their value
according to received votes. Then, an attacker who becomes
the leader could send different proposals to each node. This
would fragment the honest nodes’ compute power and give
the attacker time to form six quorums, three per conﬂicting
state. The probability of the attacker becoming leader is at
least α in each round. This would be a catastrophic attack.
The actual block preference rule selects the value with
the highest progress among all known proposals. Therefore,
as soon as the ﬁrst vote is received from an honest node,
all honest nodes converge to a single value. As a result, the
attacker would have to form six complete quorums in the time
the honest nodes get assigned a single ATV and broadcast the
corresponding vote. Since 6k
α≫ 1
1−α, such an attack becomes
infeasible for large quorum sizes k and α < 1/2.
5.2.2 Censoring In the censoring scenario, the attacker
wants to control the values on which consensus is achieved
for some time. This means he has to be elected as leader in
multiple (m) consecutive blocks.
We start with the probability of an attacker becoming the
leader in a single round. Without deviating from the protocol,
he leads with probability α. This means he could successfully
censor HotPoW for m consecutive blocks with probability αm.
However, naively following the protocol is not the best
censoring strategy. Taking inspiration from the work on selﬁsh
mining [22, 40, 59], we argue that an attacker can do better
by withholding information. A selﬁsh miner in Nakamoto
consensus withholds complete blocks, such that other miners
work on an irrelevant part of the chain. HotPoW has a more
granular type of information: an attacker might withhold his
votes. A censoring attacker would release his votes only when
the release implies leadership. In practice, this means that
a censoring attacker does not share votes, he only proposes
blocks. Using this strategy, the attacker can delay the next
quorum until the honest nodes can form one without the
attacker’s votes. This time window increases the attacker’s
odds of becoming the leader.
We implement this censor strategy and instantiate it in
a special attacker node of the simulation environment (see
Fig. 7). We bias the assignment of ATVs towards this node
such that it posesses computational power α. We routinely
check for forks, but do not ﬁnd any. We count how many of
the committed blocks are proposed by the attacker in order
to estimate the probability of leadership per round. Figure 11
shows this estimate as a function of the quorum size for
different attacker strengths α. Using the described withhold-
ing strategy, an α = 1/3 attacker contributes roughly 42 %
(α = 1/2: 64 %) of the blocks. For comparison, the upper
bound for block withholding strategies for the same attacker
on Nakamoto consensus is 50 % (α = 1/2: 100 %) [59].
We additionally validate the results on the censor strategy
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
leadership
1 2 4 8 32 64 128 256k
naive
censor
censor (MC)
Figure 11: The attacker’s share of committed block as a func-
tion of quorum size for α∈
{ 1
50 , 1
10 , 1
5 , 1
3 , 1
2
}
(bottom-up) in
two independent simulations (network and MC).
using an independent Monte Carlo (MC) simulation. (See
Appendix B for details.) As depicted in Figure 11, the MC
analysis conﬁrms the network simulation.
5.2.3 Chain Quality and Incentive Compatibility The
prevalent strategy for increasing the own share of blocks and
rewards is selﬁsh mining [ 22, 50, 59]. This attack is inher-
ently connected with incentives. Its basic idea is to withhold
and strategically release blocks in order to create an informa-
tion asymmetry that allows to reap a disproportional amount
of rewards for the invested share of work. This idea is not
directly transferrable from Nakamoto consensus to HotPoW
for three reasons. First, the ﬁnality after three blocks substan-
tially limits the horizon of the selﬁsh miner. Second, block
proposals are less valuable. They are not signiﬁcant sources
of reward. Third, block proposals are less critical. In fact,
block withholding reduces to the situation of leader failure.
Since votes can be reused, honest nodes can replace missing
proposals very fast (see Section 5.1.3). This makes proposals
less rare events than in Nakamoto consensus, limiting the
strategic advantage of withholding them.
However, as we have argued in Section 5.2.2, it is a valid
strategy to withhold votes. Therefore, we analyze the effect of
vote withholding on the distribution of rewards, assuming a
constant reward per committed vote, like in Bobtail [9]. The
naive strategy yields a share of α of the votes. The attacker’s
goal is to maximize the number of votes he contributes to
each quorum. Since only the leader can decide which votes
are included in a proposed quorum, the ﬁrst step of optimal
vote withholding is to increase the odds of becoming the
leader. This, in turn, can be achieved by withholding votes!
The circularity indicates that the attack can be approximated
with the censoring strategy discussed in Section 5.2.2.
Figure 12 shows simulation results on how the strategy, α,
and the quorum size affect the share of attacker votes com-
10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
votes
1 2 4 8 32 64 128 256k
naive
censor
censor (MC)
Figure 12: The attacker’s share of committed votes as a func-
tion of quorum size for α∈
{ 1
50 , 1
10 , 1
5 , 1
3 , 1
2
}
(bottom-up) in
two independent simulations (network and MC).
mitted to the chain. Interestingly, the censor receives fewer
rewards than honest nodes and naive attackers, indicating a
dilemma between paying for becoming the leader and cap-
italizing the power of leadership. The tradeoff is visible by
comparing Figures 11 and 12. A similar tradeoff appears
for the so-called “proof withholding” strategy in Bobtail [9],
which resembles the censoring strategy in HotPoW.
Again, we compare the protocol implementation in the
network simulation with the idealized MC model described
in Appendix B.
5.3 Overhead
Nakamoto consensus requires one message broadcast per
block, namely the block itself, independent of the number
of participating nodes. HotPoW adds k message broadcasts
per block—one for each vote. V otes are much smaller than
blocks. Under the conservative assumptions of 256 bits for
block reference and public key, and 64 bits for the puzzle
solution, a vote is 72 B.7
The number of messages is constant in the number of nodes,
like in Bitcoin. However, block headers grow. HotPoW must
store the complete quorum with k puzzle solutions. This over-
head matters because the header is replicated in all nodes that
want to verify the blockchain in the future.
Assuming the same vote size and the most robust case an-
alyzed (k = 256), the storage overhead is about 10 kB per
block. This is less than 1 % of Bitcoin’s average block size
in 2019. With this choice of k, falsely accepting a quorum
as unique is much less likely than guessing a 128-bit key in
one attempt. Table A.1 (in the appendix) shows the storage
overhead per block and the associated probability of ambi-
guity at expected optimistic quorum time (Corollary 2) for
7Bitcoin shortens public keys to 160 bits and uses solutions of 32 bits. Its
blocks are in the order of 1 MB.
Table 1: A comparison of related distributed log protocols.
PBFT
HotStuff
Proof-of-Stake
Nakamoto
Bitcoin-NG
Byzcoin
Bobtail
HotPoW
# nodes 10 10 2 103 103 103 103 103 103
committee ✓ (✓) ( ✓) ✓ ✓ ✓
permissioned
- network ✓ ✓
- committee ✓
resource binding (see Fig. 13)
- BTP ✓ ✓
- BTI ✓ ✓ ✓
sidechain ✓ ✓
ﬁnality ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
(✓): Bitcoin and Bitcoin-NG use single-node committees.
different choices of k. We argue that the beneﬁts of the pro-
tocol outweigh its storage costs and leave the exploration of
compression techniques to future work.
6 Discussion
6.1 Relation to Other Distributed Logs
New distributed log protocols are proposed almost every
month. We do not claim to know all of them and we do not
attempt to provide a complete map of the design space, since
other researchers have specialized on this task [7, 13]. Instead,
we compare HotPoW to some of its closest relatives along
selected dimensions (see Table 1).
6.1.1 Number of Nodes Early BFT protocols were de-
signed for a small number of nodes. PBFT [14], for example,
is proven secure under the Byzantine assumptions BFT-1 and
BFT-2. It requires multiple rounds of voting to reach con-
sensus on a single value. The communication complexity of
O(n2) renders it impractical for more than a dozen nodes n.
HotStuff [65] ensures safety under the same assumptions,
but increases the rate of conﬁrmed values to one per round
of voting. Its key idea is to pipeline the commit phases of
iterative consensus (recall Fig. 3). Moreover, it reduces com-
munication complexity to O(n) by routing all communication
through a leader. These two changes make HotStuff practi-
cal for larger networks. However, all correct nodes actively
participate (send messages) for each block.
6.1.2 Committee Protocols designed for even larger scale
reduce communication complexity further by electing com-
mittees. Only committee members participate actively. All
11
Bound to proposal (BTP)
timeresource binding
publish
deﬁne
proposal
ﬁnd
solution
Bound to identiﬁer (BTI)
timeresource binding
publish
deﬁne
identiﬁer
ﬁnd
solution
deﬁne
proposal
competition
Figure 13: Resources can be bound to concrete proposals or
to identiﬁers, which are later used to sign proposals.
other nodes wait until they become part of a committee.
In Nakamoto consensus, write-access to the ledger is con-
trolled by a proof-of-work puzzle. In each round, one node –
the ﬁnder of the block – broadcasts a message. Consequently,
successful miners can be interpreted as single-node commit-
tees. In Bobtail [9] and HotPoW, multiple proof-of-work puz-
zles are solved per block. Consequently the committee size
is greater than one. The committee approach is also followed
by proof-of-stake protocols. Here, committee membership is
tied to the possession of transferable digital assets (stake).
6.1.3 Permissioned As stated earlier (Sect. 3), assump-
tion BFT-1 can only be satisﬁed by restricting access to the
network based on identities assigned by an external identity
provider or gatekeeper. Consequently, protocols relying on
this assumption are permissioned on the network layer.
Proof-of-stake internalizes the gatekeeping functionality by
restricting access to the committee based on the distribution
of stake. While participating as a node is possible without
permission, access to the committee is still permissioned.
In proof-of-work systems any agent can join and leave
the network and has a (fair) chance of becoming committee
member without obtaining permission from a gatekeeper.8
6.1.4 Resource Binding Proof-of-work can be seen as a
commitment of resources to a value. Typically, these values
are chosen locally on each node. Freshness is guaranteed
by including a reference to recent puzzle solutions in the
value. We distinguish between resources bound to a proposal
(BTP) for an upcoming state update and resources bound to
an identiﬁer (BTI) used for entering the committee.
Nakamoto consensus uses BTP. Nodes form a proposal for
the next block locally and then start to solve a proof-of-work
for this proposal. If they are successful in ﬁnding a puzzle
8We ignore the role of the supply chain for puzzle solving equipment.
solution, they share their proposal. This process is depicted
in the upper half of Figure 13.
Bitcoin-NG [23] innovated by translating the concept of
leader election from the BFT literature (e. g., [20, 28, 51]) to
Nakamoto consensus. The miner of a block (elected leader)
becomes responsible for appending multiple consecutive (mi-
cro) blocks until the next leader emerges with the next mined
block. In our framework, Bitcoin-NG adds throughput by
switching from BTP to BTI in Nakamoto consensus. A more
elaborate BTI protocol is Byzcoin [41]. It forms a committee
over the last k successful miners. This rolling committee is
then responsible for appending micro blocks. Byzcoin uses
PBFT to reach ﬁnal consensus within each committee, thereby
shifting control over the micro blocks from a single node
(Bitcoin-NG) to multiple nodes.
HotPoW is a BTI protocol: nodes bind resources to identi-
ﬁers by mining votes. If they happen to lead when the quorum
is complete, they sign a block proposal with their secret key.
The lower half of Figure 13 shows this order of events.
Bobtail extends HotPoW by binding a preliminary transac-
tion list into the proof-of-work solution of each vote.9 This
BTP aspect of Bobtail adds signiﬁcant complexity to the vot-
ing logic in order to prevent the reuse of votes for different
competing proposals. As described in Section 5, HotPoW
makes the reuse of votes a key feature.
6.1.5 Sidechain The sequences of micro blocks in Bitcoin-
NG, Byzcoin, and also Thunderella [54] are often referred to
as sidechains. Sidechains can serve several purposes, such as
increasing throughput (Bitcoin-NG) or adding ﬁnality (Byz-
coin). However, since different mechanisms are used to ad-
vance different chains, synchronization is a major problem.
Bitcoin-NG tackles it with incentives, Thunderella focuses on
an optimistic case, and Byzcoin leaves open which chain has
priority. Sidechains often involve high protocol complexity
because different consensus mechanisms are stacked onto
each other: the protocols require a distributed log in order to
provide a distributed log (with different properties). By con-
trast, HotPoW provides an improved distributed log directly
from a broadcast network and proof-of-work.
6.1.6 Finality The lack of ﬁnality in Nakamoto consensus
exposes it to many attacks [4, 10, 12, 29]. So far, according to
conventional wisdom, eventual consistency has been accepted
as the price of a truly permissionless system. Byzcoin chal-
lenged this view with a stacked solution involving sidechains.
HotPoW achieves the same at lower protocol complexity us-
ing proof-of-work quorums. Their stochastic uniqueness al-
lows us to transfer the commit process from the permissioned
world to the permissionless.
9Since Bobtail inspired HotPoW, a better frame is to see HotPoW as
simpliﬁcation of Bobtail rather than Bobtail as an extension to HotPoW.
12
6.2 Other Related Protocols
Not included in Table 1 are protocol proposals that replace the
linear data structure of the distributed log with more general
directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) [61, 62]. This promises higher
scalability and faster ﬁrst conﬁrmation in latent networks at
the cost of additional complexity on the application layer,
which cannot rely on the total order and uniqueness of state
updates anymore. Also Fruitchain [52] can be interpreted as
a DAG: it recognizes solutions to hard and easy puzzles but
hides the DAG’s complexity from the application layer by not
allowing ‘fruits’ to carry state updates.
An even more radical approach is to drop the distributed log
completely and implement a digital asset directly on a secure
(source-ordered) broadcast without consensus [32]. However,
this approach restricts the versatility of the application layer.
For example, arbitrary smart contract logic is not supported.
6.3 Limitations and Future Work
We have presented a protocol that achieves ﬁnality in a per-
missionless setting under axiomatic exclusion of the failure
modes PoW-1 and PoW-2, and the acceptance of a negligible
failure probability. The assumption on PoW-1 and PoW-2 are
also made for security proofs of Nakamoto consensus [27, 55].
Nevertheless, it is worth discussing their suitability.
Excluding PoW-1 corresponds to assuming a ﬁxed,
network-wide compute power λ. But agents can add and
remove nodes at their willing. Even if the number of nodes
is ﬁxed, the computational power of each node is not. We
observe in practice that a control loop, known as difﬁculty
adjustment (DA), can compensate changes ofλ up to a certain
degree. But ample literature shows that the deployed DA algo-
rithms are not optimal [25, 36, 42, 47], especially in case of
sudden changes of λ. We argue that proof-of-work quorums
can support more precise difﬁculty adjustment algorithms. A
higher quorum size implies more votes and hence more data
points to inform the algorithm about changes of λ.
The same effect can be exploited for detecting network-
level attacks, such as eclipse and splits, more accurately. (Ap-
pendix C provides additional details.) This is relevant in the
context of the CAP theorem [ 30], which tells us that every
distributed system has to sacriﬁce one out of consistency,
availability and partition tolerance. HotPoW, as presented,
favors availability over consistency. It does not implement
a mechanism for detecting network splits, even though it is
possible at high conﬁdence for big quorum sizes. The trade-
off could be changed in favor of consistency. If a split is
detected, the protocol withholds commits (and may notify the
application layer in order to trigger out-of-band resolutions).
The second failure mode, PoW-2, can be catastrophic and
is hard to rule out. We are not aware of any argument that
bounds α to a constant below 50 % for any proof-of-work
system. In fact, >50 % attacks have been mounted against
smaller instances of Nakamoto consensus in practice [21].
Our network simulation in Section 5 models exponentially
distributed message propagation times. This distribution puts
the system under pressure, but it is not very realistic. Future
work might put the simulation on a more structured network
topology. However, since the literature reports a signiﬁcant
discrepancy between observed topologies and what cryptocur-
rencies are designed for [ 17, 46], it is not obvious what an
appropriate topology would look like.
Similarly, we leave unexplored how to disseminate Hot-
PoW’s smaller vote messages efﬁciently. V otes easily ﬁt into
single Internet packets and their veriﬁcation requires only one
hash evaluation. It might be possible to improve vote propaga-
tion times using UDP-based structured broadcast [58] instead
of the gossip broadcast used in many cryptocurrencies.
Finally, we refrain from designing an incentive mechanism
for HotPoW for the reasons stated in Section 4.3. A principled
approach would be to explore reward-optimizing strategies
(combined withholding of votes and blocks) automatically
using Markov Decision Processes [59, 66] or even more so-
phisticated Reinforcement Learning techniques [35].
7 Conclusion
We understand HotPoW as a positive example to support our
claim that it is possible to build permissionless distributed
logs with ﬁnality directly from proof-of-work. The claim is
tentatively supported (with analysis and simulations) until
HotPoW is broken. We invite the community to prove our
claim wrong, and provide running code online to facilitate
this task.10 It is not safe to use this code in systems dealing
with real values.
Regardless of whether our claim is true or false, the iden-
tiﬁed conﬂict between inclusiveness and security is instruc-
tive, and the associated theory of quorums on stochastic pro-
cesses may ﬁnd applications elsewhere. Since it comprises
Nakamoto consensus as a special case, it also contributes to a
better understanding of the role of proof-of-work in known
systems that “work in practice, but [so far] not in theory” [11].
If our claim holds, we have found a way to build permission-
less distributed logs from proof-of-work that can serve many
applications better than existing systems. However, proof-
of-work is a very wasteful way of establishing consensus. It
should be avoided whenever possible. Only if there is no al-
ternative to proof-of-work, HotPoW should be considered as
a replacement for Nakamoto consensus.
References
[1] Ittai Abraham and Dahlia Malkhi. The Blockchain Con-
sensus Layer and BFT. Bulletin of the EATCS , 123,
2017.
10https://github.com/pkel/hotpow/tree/arxiv_v3
13
[2] Maria Apostolaki, Aviv Zohar, and Laurent Vanbever.
Hijacking Bitcoin: Routing Attacks on Cryptocurren-
cies. In Proceedings of SP ’17. IEEE, May 2017.
[3] James Aspnes, Collin Jackson, and Arvind Krishna-
murthy. Exposing computationally-challenged Byzan-
tine impostors. Technical Report YALEU/DCS/TR-
1332, Yale University Department of Computer Science,
July 2005.
[4] Raphael Auer. Beyond the Doomsday Economics of
"Proof-of-Work" in Cryptocurrencies. BIS Working
Paper Series 765, January 2019.
[5] Adam Back, Matt Corallo, Luke Dashjr, Mark Frieden-
bach, Gregory Maxwell, Andrew Miller, Andrew Poel-
stra, Jorge Timón, and Pieter Wuille. Enabling Block-
chain Innovations with Pegged Sidechains. Technical
report, Blockstream, 2014.
[6] Christian Badertscher, Juan Garay, Ueli Maurer, Daniel
Tschudi, and Vassilis Zikas. But Why Does It Work?
A Rational Protocol Design Treatment of Bitcoin. In
Proceedings of EUROCRYPT ’18. Springer, 2018.
[7] Shehar Bano, Alberto Sonnino, Mustafa Al-Bassam,
Sarah Azouvi, Patrick McCorry, Sarah Meiklejohn, and
George Danezis. SoK: Consensus in the Age of
Blockchains. In Proceedings of AFT ’19. ACM, Oc-
tober 2019.
[8] Mathieu Baudet, Avery Ching, Andrey Chursin, George
Danezis, François Garillot, Zekun Li, Dahlia Malkhi,
Oded Naor, Dmitri Perelman, and Alberto Sonnino.
State Machine Replication in the Libra Blockchain.
Technical report, Calibra, 2019.
[9] George Bissias and Brian N Levine. Bobtail: Improved
Blockchain Security with Low-Variance Mining. In
Proceedings of NDSS ’20. Internet Society, February
2020.
[10] Joseph Bonneau. Why Buy When You Can Rent? In
Proceedings of FC ’16 Workshops. Springer, 2016.
[11] Joseph Bonneau, Andrew Miller, Jeremy Clark, Arvind
Narayanan, Joshua A. Kroll, and Edward W. Felten.
SoK: Research Perspectives and Challenges for Bitcoin
and Cryptocurrencies. In Proceedings of SP ’15. IEEE,
May 2015.
[12] Eric Budish. The Economic Limits of Bitcoin and the
Blockchain. Working Paper 24717, National Bureau of
Economic Research, June 2018.
[13] Christian Cachin and Marko Vukolic. Blockchain Con-
sensus Protocols in the Wild (Keynote Talk). In Pro-
ceedings of DISC ’17, 2017.
[14] Miguel Castro and Barbara Liskov. Practical Byzantine
Fault Tolerance and Proactive Recovery. ACM Transac-
tions on Computer Systems, 20(4):398–461, November
2002.
[15] Kyle Croman, Christian Decker, Ittay Eyal, Adem Efe
Gencer, Ari Juels, Ahmed Kosba, Andrew Miller, Pra-
teek Saxena, Elaine Shi, Emin Gün Sirer, Dawn Song,
and Roger Wattenhofer. On Scaling Decentralized
Blockchains. In Proceedings of FC ’16 Workshops .
Springer, 2016.
[16] Christian Decker and Roger Wattenhofer. Information
propagation in the Bitcoin network. In Proceedings of
P2P ’13. IEEE, September 2013.
[17] Sergi Delgado-Segura, Surya Bakshi, Cristina Pérez-
Solà, James Litton, Andrew Pachulski, Andrew Miller,
and Bobby Bhattacharjee. TxProbe: Discovering Bit-
coin’s Network Topology Using Orphan Transactions.
In Proceedings of FC ’19. Springer, 2019.
[18] Nicola Dimitri. Bitcoin Mining as a Contest. Ledger, 2:
31–37, September 2017.
[19] John R. Douceur. The Sybil Attack. In Proceedings of
IPTPS ’02. Springer, 2002.
[20] Cynthia Dwork, Nancy Lynch, and Larry Stockmeyer.
Consensus in the Presence of Partial Synchrony.Journal
of the ACM, 35(2):288–323, April 1988.
[21] Attah Elikem. Five most proliﬁc 51% attacks in crypto:
Verge, Ethereum Classic, Bitcoin Gold, Feathercoin,
Vertcoin. https://cryptoslate.com/prolific-
51-attacks-crypto-verge-ethereum-classic-
bitcoin-gold-feathercoin-vertcoin/ , April
2019. Accessed 2020-02-13.
[22] Ittay Eyal and Emin Gün Sirer. Majority Is Not Enough:
Bitcoin Mining Is Vulnerable. In Proceedings of FC ’14.
Springer, 2014.
[23] Ittay Eyal, Adem Efe Gencer, Emin Gün Sirer, and Rob-
bert van Renesse. Bitcoin-NG: A Scalable Blockchain
Protocol. In Proceedings of NSDI ’16. USENIX, 2016.
[24] James W. Friedman. A Non-cooperative Equilibrium
for Supergames. The Review of Economic Studies, 38
(1):1–12, 1971.
[25] Daniel Fullmer and A. Stephen Morse. Analysis of Difﬁ-
culty Control in Bitcoin and Proof-of-Work Blockchains.
In Proceedings of CDC ’18. IEEE, December 2018.
[26] Juan Garay, Jonathan Katz, Ueli Maurer, Björn Tack-
mann, and Vassilis Zikas. Rational Protocol Design:
Cryptography against Incentive-Driven Adversaries. In
Proceedings of FOCS ’13. IEEE, October 2013.
14
[27] Juan Garay, Aggelos Kiayias, and Nikos Leonardos. The
Bitcoin Backbone Protocol: Analysis and Applications.
In Proceedings of EUROCRYPT ’15. Springer, 2015.
[28] Hector Garcia-Molina. Elections in a Distributed Com-
puting System. IEEE Transactions on Computers, C-31
(1):48–59, January 1982.
[29] Arthur Gervais, Ghassan O. Karame, Karl Wüst,
Vasileios Glykantzis, Hubert Ritzdorf, and Srdjan Cap-
kun. On the Security and Performance of Proof of Work
Blockchains. In Proceedings of CCS ’16. ACM, 2016.
[30] Seth Gilbert and Nancy Lynch. Brewer’s Conjecture
and the Feasibility of Consistent, Available, Partition-
tolerant Web Services. ACM SIGACT News, 33(2):51–
59, June 2002.
[31] Adam Groce, Jonathan Katz, Aishwarya Thiruven-
gadam, and Vassilis Zikas. Byzantine Agreement with
a Rational Adversary. In Proceedings of ICALP ’12.
Springer, 2012.
[32] Rachid Guerraoui, Petr Kuznetsov, Matteo Monti, Matej
Pavloviˇc, and Dragos-Adrian Seredinschi. The Consen-
sus Number of a Cryptocurrency. In Proceedings of
PODC ’19. ACM, July 2019.
[33] Ethan Heilman, Alison Kendler, Aviv Zohar, and Sharon
Goldberg. Eclipse Attacks on Bitcoin’s Peer-to-Peer
Network. In Proceedings of Security ’15. USENIX,
2015.
[34] John R. Hicks. Critical Essays in Monetary Theory .
Clarendon Press, 1967.
[35] Charlie Hou, Mingxun Zhou, Yan Ji, Phil Daian, Flo-
rian Tramer, Giulia Fanti, and Ari Juels. SquirRL:
Automating Attack Discovery on Blockchain Incen-
tive Mechanisms with Deep Reinforcement Learning.
arXiv:1912.01798 [cs], December 2019.
[36] Geir Hovland and Jan Kucera. Nonlinear Feedback Con-
trol and Stability Analysis of a Proof-of-Work Block-
chain. Modeling, Identiﬁcation and Control, 38(4):157–
168, October 2017.
[37] Aljosha Judmayer, Alexei Zamyatin, Nicholas Stifter,
Artemios G. V oyiatzis, and Edgar Weippl. Merged
Mining: Curse or Cure? In Proceedings of CBT ’17.
Springer, 2017.
[38] Ghassan O. Karame, Elli Androulaki, and Srdjan Cap-
kun. Double-spending Fast Payments in Bitcoin. In
Proceedings of CCS ’12. ACM, 2012.
[39] Jonathan Katz and Yehuda Lindell. Introduction to
Modern Cryptography, Second Edition . CRC Press,
2014.
[40] Aggelos Kiayias, Elias Koutsoupias, Maria Kyropoulou,
and Yiannis Tselekounis. Blockchain Mining Games.
In Proceedings of EC ’16. ACM, 2016.
[41] Eleftherios Kokoris Kogias, Philipp Jovanovic, Nicolas
Gailly, Ismail Khofﬁ, Linus Gasser, and Bryan Ford. En-
hancing Bitcoin Security and Performance with Strong
Consistency via Collective Signing. In Proceedings of
Security ’16. USENIX, 2016.
[42] Daniel Kraft. Difﬁculty control for blockchain-based
consensus systems. Peer-to-Peer Networking and Appli-
cations, 9(2):397–413, March 2016.
[43] Leslie Lamport. Time, Clocks, and the Ordering of
Events in a Distributed System. Communications of the
ACM, 21(7):558–565, July 1978.
[44] Leslie Lamport, Robert Shostak, and Marshall Pease.
The Byzantine Generals Problem. ACM Transactions
on Programming Languages and Systems, 4(3):382–401,
July 1982.
[45] Dahlia Malkhi and Michael Reiter. Byzantine Quorum
Systems. Distributed Computing, 11(4):203–213, Octo-
ber 1998.
[46] Sami Ben Mariem, Pedro Casas, Matteo Romiti, Benoit
Donnet, Rainer Stutz, and Bernhard Haslhofer. All that
Glitters is not Bitcoin – Unveiling the Centralized Na-
ture of the BTC (IP) Network. arXiv:2001.09105 [cs],
January 2020.
[47] Dmitry Meshkov, Alexander Chepurnoy, and Marc
Jansen. Short Paper: Revisiting Difﬁculty Control
for Blockchain Systems. In Proceedings of CBT ’17.
Springer, 2017.
[48] Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic
Cash System. Technical report, 2008.
[49] Arvind Narayanan and Jeremy Clark. Bitcoin’s Aca-
demic Pedigree. Communications of the ACM, 60(12):
36–45, November 2017.
[50] Kevin Alarcon Negy, Peter Rizun, and Emin Gun Sirer.
Selﬁsh Mining Re-Examined. In Proceedings of FC ’20.
Preprint, 2020.
[51] Diego Ongaro and John Ousterhout. In Search of an
Understandable Consensus Algorithm. In Proceedings
of ATC ’14. USENIX, 2014.
[52] Rafael Pass and Elaine Shi. FruitChains: A Fair Block-
chain. In Proceedings of PODC ’17. ACM, 2017.
[53] Rafael Pass and Elaine Shi. Hybrid Consensus: Efﬁcient
Consensus in the Permissionless Model. In Proceedings
of DISC ’17, 2017.
15
[54] Rafael Pass and Elaine Shi. Thunderella: Blockchains
with Optimistic Instant Conﬁrmation. In Proceedings
of EUROCRYPT ’18. Springer, 2018.
[55] Rafael Pass, Lior Seeman, and Abhi Shelat. Analysis of
the Blockchain Protocol in Asynchronous Networks. In
Proceedings of EUROCRYPT ’17. Springer, 2017.
[56] Julien Prat and Benjamin Walter. An Equilibrium Model
of the Market for Bitcoin Mining. CESifo Working
Paper Series 6865, 2018.
[57] Herbert Robbins. A Remark on Stirling’s Formula. The
American Mathematical Monthly, 62(1):26–29, 1955.
[58] Elias Rohrer and Florian Tschorsch. Kadcast: A Struc-
tured Approach to Broadcast in Blockchain Networks.
In Proceedings of AFT ’19. ACM, October 2019.
[59] Ayelet Sapirshtein, Yonatan Sompolinsky, and Aviv Zo-
har. Optimal Selﬁsh Mining Strategies in Bitcoin. In
Proceedings of FC ’16. Springer, 2016.
[60] Fred B. Schneider. Implementing Fault-tolerant Ser-
vices Using the State Machine Approach: A Tutorial.
ACM Computing Surveys , 22(4):299–319, December
1990.
[61] Yonatan Sompolinsky and Aviv Zohar. Secure High-
Rate Transaction Processing in Bitcoin. In Proceedings
of FC ’15. Springer, 2015.
[62] Yonatan Sompolinsky, Yoad Lewenberg, and Aviv Zo-
har. SPECTRE: A Fast and Scalable Cryptocurrency
Protocol. Cryptology ePrint Archive 1159, IACR, 2016.
[63] William J. Stewart. Probability, Markov Chains, Queues,
and Simulation: The Mathematical Basis of Perfor-
mance Modeling. Princeton University Press, July 2009.
[64] Florian Tschorsch and Björn Scheuermann. Bitcoin and
Beyond: A Technical Survey on Decentralized Digital
Currencies. IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials,
18(3):2084–2123, 2016.
[65] Maofan Yin, Dahlia Malkhi, Michael K. Reiter,
Guy Golan Gueta, and Ittai Abraham. HotStuff: BFT
Consensus with Linearity and Responsiveness. In Pro-
ceedings of PODC ’19. ACM, July 2019.
[66] Ren Zhang and Bart Preneel. Lay Down the Common
Metrics: Evaluating Proof-of-Work Consensus Proto-
cols’ Security. In Proceedings of SP ’19. IEEE, May
2019.
A Proofs, Figures, and Visualizations
Lemma 1 The POA for the Poisson process Pλ is given by
poaPλ,k(t) = 1− e−λt
2k−1
∑
i=0
(λt)i
i! .
Proof. P λ has the following properties [63, p. 389]:
1. Pr
[
Pλ(0) = 0
]
= 1,
2. Pλ(t)− Pλ(s)∼ Poisson(λ· (t− s)) for all s < t, and
3. for n∈ N and 0 < t1 <··· < tn, the family of random
variables
{Pλ(ti)− Pλ(ti−1)| 2≤ i≤ n}
is stochastically independent.
According to Deﬁnition 4,
poaPλ,k(t) =Pr
[
Pλ(t)≥ 2k
]
(1)
=1− Pr
[
Pλ(t)≤ 2k− 1
]
. (2)
By setting s = 0 in property 2 of the Poisson process and
using property 1, we conclude that Pλ(t)∼ Poisson(λt). By
evaluating the cumulative distribution function of the Poisson
distribution
FPoisson(n; λ′) = e−λ′
⌊n⌋
∑
i=0
λ′i
i! (3)
for n = 2k− 1 and λ′ = λt, we obtain the stated result.
Lemma 2 The optimistic k-quorum time for the Poisson
process is Erlang distributed with shape parameter k and rate
parameter λ, in short
TPλ,k∼ Erlang(k, λ) .
Proof. The time between two consecutive count events of
Pλ is exponentially distributed with rate parameter λ. The
times between any two consecutive count events are stochas-
tically independent. The sum of k independent and identi-
cally distributed exponential random variables is Erlang dis-
tributed [63, p. 146] with shape parameter k and rate parame-
ter λ.
Theorem 1 For the Poisson process, the probability of am-
biguity at the expected quorum time is negligible in the quo-
rum size k.
Proof. Let
f (k) := poaPλ,k(¯tλ,k) = 1− e−k
2k−1
∑
i=0
ki
i! . (4)
16
/user-cog
/user-cog
/user-cog
/user-cog
/user-cog
/user-cog
/user-cog
t
/list
/list✓
/list✓
/list✓
/list✓
/list✓
/list✓/list✓
/list✓
/list✓
/list✓
/list✓
/list✓
/list✓
(a) In Bitcoin, puzzles are solved sequentially. Solutions are bound to block proposals, implying exponentially distributed block intervals.
/user-cog
/user-cog
/user-cog
/user-cog
/user-cog
/user-cog
/user-cog
t
/list
/list
/list
/list /list
/list
/list
✓
✓
✓✓
✓
✓
🏆
✓
✓✓
✓
✓
✓
🏆
✓✓
✓✓
🏆
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓ ✓✓
✓
✓
✓
🏆
✓
✓
✓✓✓
🏆
✓
✓
✓✓
🏆
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓✓
✓
✓🏆✓
✓
✓✓
/list
/list
/list
/list /list
/list
/list
✓
✓
✓✓
✓
✓
🏆
✓
✓✓
✓
✓
✓
🏆
✓✓
✓✓
🏆
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓ ✓✓
✓
✓
✓
🏆
✓
✓
✓✓✓
🏆
✓
✓
✓✓
🏆
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓✓
✓
✓🏆✓
✓
✓✓
(b) In HotPoW, smaller puzzles are solved in parallel. One of the solutions is chosen as leader, the corresponding miner collects the quorum
(k = 8 votes) and proposes the next block. Thereby, HotPoW enables more regular block intervals and more frequent rewards for miners.
✓ puzzle solution
🏆 leading puzzle solution
/listproposal
message
block arrival time
puzzle reference
(c) Symbols and their meaning.
Figure A.1: Simulated executions of Bitcoin and HotPoW on n = 7 nodes (y-axis) over time (x-axis).
17
Our ﬁrst observation is that f (k) can be expressed in terms of
the regularized incomplete Gamma function P(α,k). Accord-
ing to DLMF §8.4.E911,
f (k) = P(2k,k) . (5)
Following the deﬁnition of the regularized incomplete
Gamma function (see DLMF §8.2.E4), we obtain
f (k) = γ(2k,k)
(2k− 1)! , (6)
with the incomplete Gamma function (see DLMF §8.2.E1)
γ(α,k) =
∫ k
0
tα−1e−tdt . (7)
We will prove the theorem by providing an (asymptotic) upper
bound for f (k) that decreases exponentially in k. Stirling’s
Approximation [57] provides a useful lower bound for the
factorial in the denominator of Equation 6:
n!≥
√
2πnn+ 1
2 e−n (8)
We proceed with an upper bound for the enumerator as fol-
lows. Let g(t) = t2k−1e−t be the function to integrate for
α = 2k. Like for integrals in general,
γ(2k,k) =
∫ k
0
g(t)dt≤ k· max
t∈[0,k]
g(t) . (9)
The derivative of g is g′(t) = e−t (2k− t− 1)t2k−2. For t∈
[0,k] the derivative g′ is greater than zero. Hence the function
g is monotonically increasing, the maximum is reached at the
end of the interval, and
γ(2k,k)≤ k2ke−k . (10)
Applying Approximations 8 and 10 to Equation 6, yields
f (k)≤ k2ke−k
√
2π (2k− 1)2k− 1
2 e−2k+1
(11)
=
( k√e
2k− 1
)2k√
2k− 1
2πe2 (12)
Observe that
limsup
k→∞
(
k√e
2k−1
)2k
(√e
2
)2k = limsup
k→∞
( 2k
2k− 1
)2k
= e < ∞ . (13)
Thus,
f (k) = O
( ek
4k
√
k
)
. (14)
11NIST Digital Library of Mathematical Functions
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
time to commit
0 0.1 0.4 0.5leader failure rate
k
2
8
32
128
Figure A.2: Pure effect of leader failure, i. e., without latency.
Supplement to Figure 10.
Table A.1: Storage overhead of HotPoW consensus.
quorum size probability of ambiguity block header
k at expected quorum time (bytes)
1 0 .2642 72
2 0 .1429 112
16 0 .0003 672
64 1 .2× 10−12 2.6 k
256 4 × 10−45 10 k
Since
√
k < 1.25k for k > 1, we can conclude
f (k) = O
( ek
4k 1.25k
)
(15)
= O
(
0.85k
)
. (16)
B Monte Carlo Simulation
We cross-check the implementation of the censor strategy and
its behavior in the network simulation (see Sect. 5.2.2) using
an independent Monte Carlo simulation. We model the for-
mation of individual quorums using an (Absorbing) Markov
Chain, but omit higher-level concepts such as blocks and their
chaining. The censor strategy is to generally withhold votes
until either the attacker can form a quorum as leader, or the
defender forms a quorum without any of the attacker’s (with-
held) votes. In a protocol execution, the ﬁrst case (SUCCESS )
applies when the attacker proposes a block which the honest
nodes accept. The second case (FAIL) applies when the honest
nodes propose a block.
State representation and initialization We model the cur-
rent state as a triple (a,d,l), where a∈ N denotes the number
of (withheld) attacker votes, d∈ N (for defender) denotes the
18
a,d,⊤
a + 1,d,⊤
a,d + 1,⊥
a,d + 1,⊤
α
(1− α)/(a + d + 1)
(1− α)· (a + d)/(a + d + 1)
attacker extends lead
defender obtains lead
following defender catches up
a,d,⊥
a,d + 1,⊥
a + 1,d,⊤
a + 1,d,⊥
1− α
α/(a + d + 1)
α· (a + d)/(a + d + 1)
defender extends lead
attacker obtains lead
following attacker catches up
Figure B.1: Probabilistic state transitions in the Markov Chain model for the censor strategy.
number of votes of the honest nodes, and l∈{⊥ ,⊤} is true if
the attacker holds the currently smallest vote. The initial state
is (1,0,⊤) with probability α and (0,1,⊥) otherwise.
State transition Figure B.1 shows an annotated state tran-
sition diagram. If l =⊤, the next state is
(a + 1,d,l) with probability α,
(a,d + 1,⊥) with probability 1− α
a + d + 1, and
(a,d + 1,l) otherwise.
If l =⊥, the next state is
(a,d + 1,l) with probability 1− α,
(a + 1,d,⊤) with probability α
a + d + 1, and
(a + 1,d,l) otherwise.
Termination If l∧ a + d≥ k, the simulation terminates in
SUCCESS . If¬l∧ d≥ k, it terminates in FAIL. The simulation
continues until one of these conditions is true.
Simulation We run the model 1 000 000 times for each com-
binations of α∈
{ 1
50 , 1
10 , 1
5 , 1
3 , 1
2
}
and k∈{1,2,4, . . . ,256}.
Figure 11 shows the fraction of cases where the simulation
Table C.1: Time until eclipse can be detected at conﬁdence
p = 0.001 (relative to the expected block time).
quorum size 1 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 256
time 6.91 3.45 1.73 0.86 0.43 0.22 0.11 0.05 0.03
terminates in SUCCESS . Figure 12 shows the average number
of attacker votes for the runs that end in SUCCESS .
C Detecting Attacks
Each vote is linked to one ATV . By assumption (Sect. 3),
the time between two consecutive ATVs is exponentially
distributed with rate λ. In an honest network, a node regularly
receives votes (and own ATVs). A node can test the hypothesis
of being eclipsed based on the arrival of votes. Table C.1
shows after how much time (relative to the block time) of not
receiving a single vote a node can rule out a natural course of
events with conﬁdence p = 0.001.
Observe that larger quorums sizes increase the detectability
of eclipse attacks. For quorum sizes greater than 8, eclipse
attacks can be detected with conﬁdence within a single ex-
pected block time. For plain Nakamoto consensus ( k = 1),
an equally powerful test requires an observation window of
almost 7 times the expected block time.
19