arXiv:2006.10698v1  [cs.DC]  18 Jun 2020
Resource Pools and the CAP Theorem
Andrew Lewis-Pye
a.lewis7@lse.ac.uk
Department of Mathematics, London School of
Economics
London
Tim Roughgarden∗
tim.roughgarden@gmail.com
Columbia University
New York
ABSTRACT
Blockchain protocols diﬀer in fundamental ways, includingthe me-
chanics of selecting users to produce blocks (e.g., proof-of-work vs.
proof-of-stake) and the method to establish consensus (e.g., longest
chain rules vs. BFT-inspired protocols). These fundamenta l diﬀer-
ences have hindered “apples-to-apples” comparisons betwe en dif-
ferent categories of blockchain protocols and, in turn, the develop-
ment of theory to formally discuss their relative merits.
This paper presents a parsimonious abstraction suﬃcient fo r
capturing and comparing properties of many well-known perm is-
sionless blockchain protocols, simultaneously capturing essential
properties of both proof-of-work and proof-of-stake protocols, and
of both longest-chain-type and BFT-type protocols. Our framework
blackboxes the precise mechanics of the user selection proc ess, al-
lowing us to isolate the properties of the selection process which
are signiﬁcant for protocol design.
We illustrate our framework’s utility with two results. Fir st, we
prove an analog of the CAP theorem from distributed computin g
for our framework in a partially synchronous setting. This t heo-
rem shows that a fundamental dichotomy holds between proto-
cols (such as Bitcoin) that are adaptive, in the sense that they can
function given unpredictable levels of participation, and protocols
(such as Algorand) that have certainﬁnality properties. Second, we
formalize the idea that proof-of-work (PoW) protocols and n on-
PoW protocols can be distinguished by the forms of permissio n
that users are given to carry out updates to the state.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Theory of computation ;
KEYWORDS
blockchains, cryptocurrencies, distributed computing, C AP theo-
rem
1 INTRODUCTION
The task of a permissionless blockchain protocol is to establish con-
sensus for message ordering over a network of users. This job is
made diﬃcult by the fact that, being subject to the laws of phy sics,
the underlying communication network must havelatency, i.e. broad-
cast messages will necessarily take time to travel over the network
of users. As a consequence of this latency, malicious users m ay
purposely cause the order in which messages are ﬁrst seen to b e
diﬀerent for diﬀerent honest users, and some diﬀerences in o rder-
ing will anyway be an honest consequence of varying propagation
times between diﬀerent nodes of the network [9].
∗Supported in part by NSF Award CCF-1813188, ARO grant W911NF 1910294, and a
grant from the Columbia-IBM Center for Blockchain and Data T ransparency.
Network latency is especially problematic when we work at
the level of individual transactions, which may be produced at a
rate which is high compared to network latency. For this reas on
it is standard practice to collect transactions together in to blocks,
which can then be produced at a rate which is much lower com-
pared to network latency. Given that we are working in a permi s-
sionless setting, the basic question then becomes, “Who sho uld
produce the blocks?”. This question is answered diﬀerently by dif-
ferent protocols. Three running examples, which we shall us e for
reference in this paper, are:
• Bitcoin;
• Snow White;
• Algorand.
Of course, Bitcoin [16] is the best known proof-of-work (PoW )
protocol, and is also a longest chain protocol. This means that forks
may occur in the blockchain, but that honest miners will buil d on
the longest chain. At a high level, Snow White [1] might be see n
as a proof-of-stake (PoS) version of Bitcoin – it is also a lon gest
chain protocol, but now miners are selected with probabilit y pro-
portional to their stake in the currency, rather than their h ashing
power. We use Algorand [8] as an example of a ‘BFT’ protocol. 1
This means that users are selected, and asked to carry out a co n-
sensus protocol designed for the permissioned setting. So users are
not only asked to produce blocks, but also other objects, suc h as
votes on blocks. Algorand is also a PoS protocol.
Such fundamental diﬀerences between competing blockchain
protocols have hindered “apples-to-apples” comparisons b etween
them, and a majority of the research-to-date has focused on t he
analysis of speciﬁc protocols (or narrow classes of protoco ls). Our
goal here is to complement existing work on protocol-speciﬁc anal-
ysis with a mathematical framework for formally discussing the
relative merits of protocols of very diﬀerent types.
The ﬁrst and main aim of this paper is to develop a model for the
analysis of permissionless blockchain protocols that blac kboxes
the precise mechanics of the user selection process, allowi ng us to
isolate the properties of the selection process that are sig niﬁcant,
and to make comparisons between blockchain protocols of diﬀ er-
ent types. Section 2 describes a framework of this kind, acco rding
to which protocols run relative to a resource pool . This resource
pool speciﬁes a balance for each user over the duration of the pro-
tocol execution (such as hashrate or stake), which may be use d in
determining which users are permitted to make publications up-
dating the state.
1By ‘BFT protocols’ we shall (informally) mean either: (a) Consensus protocols which
are deﬁned in the permissioned setting in order to deal with b yzantine faults, or (b)
Consensus protocols which work in the permissionless setting by importing protocols
of type (a).
Andrew Lewis-Pye and Tim Roughgarden
With this framework in place, we then turn our attention to con-
sider how properties of the resource pool may inﬂuence the fu nc-
tionality of the resulting protocol. In Sections 3 and 4, we w ill be
concerned with the distinction between scenarios in which the size
of the resource pool is known (e.g. PoS), and scenarios where the
size of the resource pool is unknown (e.g. PoW). We refer to th ese
as the sized and unsized settings, respectively. We will ﬁnd that the
choice of setting is intimately related to a fundamental tra deoﬀ for
permissionless blockchain protocols, which can be viewed a s an
analog of the CAP theorem from distributed computing [12] fo r
our framework: In a partially synchronous setting, a protoc ol can-
not deliver ﬁnality for block conﬁrmations while at the same time
being adaptive, in the sense that it remains live without knowledge
of the size of the resource pool. 2
In Section 5 we will examine a fundamental distinction between
PoW and non-PoW protocols, which concerns the forms of per-
mission that users are given to carry out updates to the state . We
formalize the idea that, under quite general conditions, Po W pro-
tocols are distinguished by their ability to allow the broad cast of
speciﬁc blocks (and other objects), rather than granting permission
to broadcast any object from a large class (such as any valid b lock
extending a given position in the blockchain). Historicall y, this is
one of the distinctions between PoW and PoS that has received the
most attention in the literature [2].
1.1 Finality and Adaptivity
Our main impossibility result, which appears in Section 4, c on-
cerns notions of ‘ﬁnality’, ‘adaptivity’, ‘security’, and‘liveness’. Be-
fore deﬁning these terms, it is useful to consider how these notions
relate to another informal division that is often drawn in th e cryp-
tocurrency community and in the literature [2], between ‘lo ngest
chain’ type protocols such as Bitcoin and Snow White on the on e
hand, and so called ‘BFT’ protocols such as Algorand [8] and T en-
dermint [3] on the other.
Roughly speaking, the term ‘longest chain’ is normally appl ied
to protocols which are derived from Bitcoin, and which work b y
having miners select a fork of the blockchain to build on, whi ch is
deﬁned in terms of some sort of scoring function for chains. T he
selected chain might be the one with the most PoW attached, or it
might be the longest, or it might be deﬁned by an inductive process
that counts the number of descendants, as in the GHOST protoc ol
[20]. BFT protocols, on the other hand, work by selecting a su bset
of users and having them carry out a more traditional consens us
protocol which is deﬁned for the permissioned setting. The t erms
‘BFT’ and ‘longest chain’ are thus descriptive of where protocols
come from, but don’t yet formally deﬁne classes of protocols in a
way that allows us to analyse the diﬀerences between them and
prove results contrasting the performance of these classes of pro-
tocols in a broad sense.
The informal idea is that there is a trade-oﬀ. While BFT pro-
tocols potentially oﬀer ﬁnality (whatever that should mean), this
comes with the price that the protocol will stall if participation lev-
els drop. In Algorand, for example, committees of users are selected
2Our impossibility result contrasts with previous works tha t prove positive re-
sults about the liveness and consistency properties of the B itcoin protocol in more
strongly synchronous settings (such as synchronous networks [11] and networks with
bounded message delays [11, 13, 17, 19]).
in rounds, and block conﬁrmation requires a certain proport ion of
committee members to contribute signatures. If participat ion lev-
els drop to a point where insuﬃciently many signatures are be ing
produced for each block, then the process of block conﬁrmati on
will come to a standstill. Longest chain protocols such as Bi tcoin,
on the other hand, do not deliver ﬁnality but are adaptive, in the
sense that they naturally adjust and remain live in the face o f ﬂuc-
tuating levels of participation.
In order to make this trade-oﬀ precise, we must decide how to
formalize ‘ﬁnality’ and ‘adaptivity’. First, let us consid er ﬁnality.
To deﬁne this notion, we focus on diﬀerentiating the setting s (e.g.,
the degree of assumed synchrony) in which protocols are secure,
meaning that block conﬁrmation can be relied on. Bitcoin andmost
other longest chain-type protocols will not be considered t o have
ﬁnality, because block conﬁrmation can only be relied on assuming
the ongoing participation of a large fraction of honest user s: Block
conﬁrmation is not secure against unbounded network partit ions
[17]. Algorand and most BFT-type protocols will have ﬁnalit y be-
cause there is essentially zero chance that conﬁrmed blocks will be
rolled back, even in the event that honest users cease to participate
after the block has been conﬁrmed, e.g. due to an extended per iod
of network failure. Section 3 formalizes this distinction a nd our
ﬁnality notion in terms of security in a partially synchronous set-
ting. The distinction between synchronous and partially synchr o-
nous settings is standard when working with permissioned pr oto-
cols [10]; see Section 2 for the deﬁnitions.
Next, let us consider adaptivity. Recall that, according to our
framework, protocols run relative to a resource pool. This resource
pool speciﬁes a balance for each user over the duration of the pro-
tocol execution (such as hashrate or stake), which may be use d in
determining which users are permitted to make publications up-
dating the state. So Bitcoin will be modeled as running relat ive to
a resource pool that speciﬁes the hashrate of each user over the du-
ration of the protocol execution, and users with greater has hrate
will be more likely to be selected for block production. In Se ction
3, we will formally deﬁne adaptivity in terms of the informat ion
about the resource pool that is available to the protocol. Fi rst, we
will deﬁne the unsized setting, so as to formalize contexts in which
the total size of the resource pool is information which is not avail-
able to the protocol. With this deﬁnition in place, and once w e
have formalized the notion of ‘liveness’ – roughly, livenes s is the
property that with high probability the set of conﬁrmed blocks will
grow over time – we will then be able to deﬁne adaptive protoco ls
as those which are live in the unsized setting. 3 Adaptive protocols
are thus those which are like Bitcoin—not necessarily in an o pera-
tional sense, but in the sense that they are live even when the total
size of the resource pool is unknown to the protocol.
1.2 The tradeoﬀ between adaptivity and
ﬁnality.
With these deﬁnitions in place, we will then be able to formal ly
prove Theorem 4.1 below, which can be seen as an analog of the
CAP Theorem [12] from distributed computing for our framework.
3One might want a protocol to satisfy stronger notions of live ness, such as quanti-
tative lower bounds on chain growth or chain quality (as in e. g. [11, 17]). The fact
that we work with such a weak notion of liveness only strength ens our impossibility
result.
Resource Pools and the CAP Theorem
Roughly speaking, ‘security’ in our framework correspondsto ‘atomic
consistency’ in the framework in which the CAP Theorem is proved
in [12], and ‘liveness’ corresponds to ‘availability’. The se corre-
spondences are not exact, however. While availability requ ires a
response even during extended periods of asynchrony, our de ﬁni-
tion of liveness explicitly rules out the requirement that n ew con-
ﬁrmed blocks should be produced under such conditions. The k ey
observation in the proof of Theorem 4.1 is that, in the unsize d set-
ting, extended periods of asynchrony cannot be distinguished from
a waning resource pool. Liveness therefore forces the produ ction
of new conﬁrmed blocks during appropriately chosen periods of
asynchrony. Liveness and security are thus incompatible inthe par-
tially synchronous and unsized setting, while the same is no t true
in the partially synchronous and sized setting.
T/h.sc/e.sc/o.sc/r.sc/e.sc/m.sc 4.1 (I/m.sc/p.sc/o.sc/s.sc/s.sc/i.sc/b.sc/i.sc/l.sc/i.sc/t.sc/y.sc R/e.sc/s.sc/u.sc/l.sc/t.sc).No protocol is both adap-
tive and has ﬁnality.
This result establishes a simple dichotomy for permissionl ess
blockchain protocols. A protocol can be adaptive or it can ha ve ﬁ-
nality, but not both. It also draws a clean and formal line bet ween
longest chain protocols such as Bitcoin and Ethereum [4], or PoS
implementations such as Snow White [1] on the one hand, and
BFT protocols such as Algorand, Casper FFG and PoS implement a-
tions of Tendermint or Hotstuﬀ [21] on the other. While the former
group are all adaptive, the latter group all have ﬁnality.
Another interesting conclusion that can be drawn from Theo-
rem 4.1 concerns PoW protocols. PoS protocols are generally best
modeled using the sized setting, while PoW protocols are generally
best modeled using the unsized setting—the total stake is ty pically
information which is available to a protocol from the beginn ing of
its execution, while the amount of computational power used to
provide PoW can vary over time in an unpredictable way. To the
extent that PoW protocols must operate in an unsized setting (and
guarantee liveness), Theorem 4.1 implies that they cannot h ave ﬁ-
nality.4
1.3 Related Work
The novel feature of Bitcoin that distinguishes it from prev ious
consensus protocols is that it is permissionless, i.e. it establishes
consensus between a set of users that anybody can join, with a s
many identities as they choose in any given role. This paper c an
be seen as a step towards developing a formal framework for th e
analysis of permissionless protocols akin to the extensive ly devel-
oped one for permissioned protocols [15]. The study of byzan tine
fault tolerant (BFT) consensus protocols in the permission ed set-
ting dates back at least to 1980 [14, 18]. Among those BFT protocols
of interest to us here, we can distinguish two forms:
(1) The oldest relevant form of BFT protocol is aimed at solvi ng
the ‘Byzantine Generals Problem’ [14, 18]. The task here is
to reach consensus on a single yes/no decision. In applying
these methods to the blockchain setting, one approach, as
employed by Algorand, is to run such a BFT protocol for
each in a sequence of proposed blocks, until consensus is
4The continual adjustment of the diﬃculty parameter in Bitco in can be viewed as an
attempt to maintain an approximation of the sized setting in a fundamentally unsized
setting. See Section 6.2 for further discussion.
reached for each block as to whether it should be included
in the blockchain. A drawback of this approach is that posi-
tive or negative consensus has to be reached for one block at
a time. A large number of rounds of communication may be
required before agreement is reached, giving a correspond-
ing negative impact on conﬁrmation times.
(2) Perhaps more appropriate for the blockchain setting, si nce
they are designed to achieve essentially the same task as per-
missionless blockchain protocols but in the permissioned
setting, are BFT protocols designed for the purpose of state
machine replication (SMR) [6, 7]. The task of such protocols
is for a set of distributed users to agree on an order of execu-
tion for an ever growing list of client-initiated service co m-
mands – replace ‘client-initiated service commands’ with
‘transactions’, and this is precisely the aim of permission -
less blockchain protocols. The advantage of this approach
is that it allows for considerably simpler protocols, which
might only require two or three rounds of communication
per block.
The CAP theorem is one of the most celebrated theorems in the
distributed computing literature. The theorem proved by Gi lbert
and Lynch [12] is a formal version of a conjecture due to Brewe r,
which is made in the context of distributed web services. The the-
orem establishes an impossibility result: It is impossible for such
a distributed service to simultaneously achieve the three d esirable
properties of consistency, availability, and partition tolerance . For
formal deﬁnitions of these terms we refer the reader to [12] a nd
[15]. The relationship between the CAP Theorem and Theorem 4.1
was brieﬂy discussed in Section 1.2, and we shall expand on th is
discussion in Section 4.
2 THE FRAMEWORK
2.1 Predetermined and undetermined variables
Our aim here is to establish a framework for analysing permission-
less blockchain protocols that blackboxes the precise mechanics of
the user selection process. This will allow us to prove impossibility
results, and to isolate the properties of the selection proc ess that
are signiﬁcant, in the sense that they impact the way in which the
protocol must be designed, or inﬂuence properties of the res ulting
protocol (such as security in a range of settings).
In order to deﬁne properties such as liveness and security la ter
on, it will be convenient to consider protocols that are speciﬁed rel-
ative to a ﬁnite set of initially deﬁned parameters. For Algorand to
run securely, for example, one must ﬁrst decide how long the p ro-
tocol is to run for, and then choose committee sizes accordin gly.
The duration of the execution is therefore required as a para meter
of the protocol. Variables that are speciﬁed before the execution of
the protocol as parameters, or which take the same value for all ex-
ecutions of the protocol, are referred to as predetermined. Variables
(such as the number of users) that are not predetermined, wil l be
referred to as undetermined.
2.2 The users
We consider settings in which protocols are executed by an un -
determined set of pseudonymous users, this set being of unde ter-
mined size. Each user is given access to a signature scheme, a nd
Andrew Lewis-Pye and Tim Roughgarden
controls a set of public keys by which they will be known to oth er
users. We use the variable U to range over users, while U will be
used to range over public keys – each user may have many public
keys. Amongst all users, there is one who is distinguished as the
adversary and who controls an undetermined set of public keys.
Users other than the adversary are referred to as honest.
We will suppose that each user is a deterministic computing d e-
vice, which has amongst the actions it can perform calls to ce rtain
oracles, as well as certain external functionalities such a s the abil-
ity to broadcast messages. The protocol speciﬁes an instruction set,
which is a program which is run by every user, other than the ad -
versary. The adversary can follow any program of their choos ing.
While we might think of the set of users as forming a network
over which messages can propagate, in order to keep things as sim-
ple as possible, we shall not make the network explicit in ourframe-
work. Users simply have the ability to broadcast messages. Once a
message is broadcast by a public key belonging to a given user , it
may subsequently be delivered to other users at diﬀerent stages of
the execution.
2.3 Network failures
We suppose that protocols are speciﬁed to run for a predetermined
sequence of timeslots, each timeslot being of predetermined length.
The appropriate length of these timeslots depends on the pro tocol
to be modeled. For many PoS protocols, an appropriate length is
slightly more than the network latency, i.e. the time it takes a block
to propagate the network. (Thus, each user might carry out ma ny
instructions during a single timeslot.) We will see that PoW pro-
tocols might be better modeled using very short timeslots. I n any
case, the sequence of timeslots is called the duration D. At the be-
ginning of each timeslot in the duration, broadcast message s may
be delivered to various users. The message state relative to a given
user is the set of all broadcast messages which have been delivered
to them. The message state for a given user is therefore monot oni-
cally increasing over time. In order to be broadcast, a message must
be valid, meaning that it must have a certain structure and that cer-
tain other conditions, expanded on below, are also satisﬁed .
For example, if modeling Bitcoin or Snow White, a user’s mes-
sage state will be the set of (valid) blocks that have been del ivered
to them. Thus the message state will not, in general, be a sing le
chain of blocks. For Algorand, a user’s message state will be all
those messages which have been delivered to them, which are e i-
ther valid blocks, or else the signed messages of committee m em-
bers exchanged while reaching consensus on blocks.
It is standard in the distributed computing literature to consider
a variety of synchronous, partially synchronous , or asynchronous
settings, in which users may or may not have clocks which are
almost synchronised, or run at varying speeds, and where mes -
sage delivery might be reliable or subject to various forms o f fail-
ure. For the sake of simplicity, we will suppose here that use rs’
clocks are synchronised – while this might seem like a strong as-
sumption, this only strengthens our impossibility result. We will,
though, allow for periods of network failure, during which t he ad-
versary is able to control message delivery. In order to form alize
this, we will suppose that the duration is divided into intervals that
are labelled either synchronous or asynchronous (meaning that each
timeslot is either synchronous or asynchronous). We will su ppose
that, during synchronous intervals, message delivery timeis proba-
bilistically distributed for each pair of users. During asynchronous
intervals, we suppose that the adversary is able to interfer e with
message delivery as they choose, i.e. the adversary can leav e mes-
sages to be delivered in a probabilistic fashion as normal, can cause
undelivered messages to be delivered early, or can stop mess ages
being delivered at all for the duration of the asynchronous i nter-
val. (Though we can always assume that a message broadcast by
a user is in eﬀect delivered instantaneously to that user.) W e then
distinguish two synchronicity settings . In the synchronous setting
it is assumed that there are no asynchronous intervals durin g the
duration, while in the partially synchronous setting there may be
undetermined asynchronous intervals.
2.4 The structure of the blockchain
Amongst all broadcast messages, there is a distinguished se t re-
ferred to as blocks, and one block which is referred to as the gene-
sis block. Unless it is the genesis block, each block B has a unique
parent block Par(B), which must be uniquely speciﬁed within the
block message. Each block is produced by a single user, Miner(B),
but may contain other broadcast messages which have been pro -
duced by other users. No block can be broadcast by U := Miner(B)
at a point strictly prior to that at which its parent has been d eliv-
ered to U. Par(B) is deﬁned to be an ancestor of B, and all of the
ancestors of Par(B) are also deﬁned to be ancestors of B. If B is not
the genesis block, then it must have the genesis block as an an ces-
tor. At any point during the duration, the set of broadcast bl ocks
thus forms a tree structure. If M is a message state, then we shall
say that it is downward closed if it contains the parents of all blocks
in M. By a leaf of M, we shall mean a block in M which is not a
parent of any block in M. If M is downward closed and contains a
single leaf, then we shall say that M is a chain.
2.5 The resource pool
Protocols are run relative to a (predetermined or undetermi ned)
resource pool, which in the general case is a function R : U × D ×
M → R≥0, where U is the set of public keys, D is the duration
and M is the set of all possible message states. So R can be thought
of as specifying the resource balance of each user at each tim eslot
in the duration, possibly relative to a given message state. For a
PoW protocol like Bitcoin, the resource balance of each publ ic key
will be their (relevant) computational power at the given ti meslot
(which is generally independent of any message state). For PoS pro-
tocols, such as Snow White and Algorand, however, the resour ce
balance will be fully determined by ‘on-chain’ information , i.e. in-
formation recorded in the message state M. Generally, a chain of
blocks C ⊆ M will ﬁrst be selected. So C might be the longest chain,
or the longest chain of blocks that have been approved by comm it-
tee members. Then R(U, t, M) will be some function of U’s stake as
recorded by the blocks in C.5
5The details here will depend on the speciﬁc protocol. It’s st andard to insist that a
user has had stake in the currency recorded for a certain numb er of timeslots before
they are allowed to produce blocks, for example. So U’s resource balance might be
their stake according to C or some initial segment of C , or else 0 if U has not been
recorded as having non-zero stake for suﬃcient time.
Resource Pools and the CAP Theorem
By the total resource balance T , we mean the sum of the resource
balances of all public keys; this is the function T : D × M → R≥0
deﬁned by T (t, M) = /summationtext.1
U R(U, t, M). It should be noted that the
resource pool is a variable, meaning that a given protocol ma y be
expected to be live and secure with respect to a range of resou rce
pools.
2.6 The sized and unsized settings
Just as we considered two synchronicity settings earlier, w e also
consider two resource settings. The basic idea is that in the sized set-
ting, the total resource balance is information which is available to
the protocol (and the permitter, as described in Section 2.7 ), while
in the unsized setting it is not. The precise details are as follows.
The unsized setting . For the unsized setting, R (and hence T ) is
undetermined, with the only restrictions being:
(1) R will be a function from U × D × M to R≥0 satisfying the
requirement that, at all timeslots in the duration, the tota l
resource balance belongs to a ﬁxed interval [I0, I1], where
I0 > 0 is suﬃciently small and I1 > I0 is suﬃciently large.6
(2) There may also be bounds placed on the resource balance
of the adversary.
We shall refer to the set of all resource pools satisfying the se
restrictions as the possible resource pools, and in Section 3 we shall
deﬁne a protocol to be live if it is live for all possible resource pools.
The sized setting. For the sized setting, the total resource balance
T is a predetermined function T : D × M → R≥0.
The basic idea is that PoS protocols will generally be best
modeled using the sized setting, while PoW protocols are best mod-
eled using the unsized setting, since one does not know the to tal
resource balance (e.g., total hashrate in each timeslot) in advance.
There are some nuanced considerations, however. With a PoS p ro-
tocol, for example, one might not be able to predict accurately what
percentage of the stake will actually come online and broadc ast as
requested by the protocol. So there may be situations in whic h it
is appropriate to deﬁne the resource balance in terms of the o nline
or contributing stake, and where it should be recognised tha t only
partial information will be available concerning the total resource
balance. Equally, there may be contexts in which good bounds can
be given on the total resource balance over the duration for t he
PoW case. The example of Bitcoin will be discussed further in Sec-
tion 6.
2.7 The permitter oracle
In order to specify how the resource pool is to be used, we shal l
make use of the notion of a permitter oracle. This is the most crit-
ical part of the model, and is the part that blackboxes user se lec-
tion, since it is the permitter oracle that grants permission to broad-
cast valid messages. The permitter oracle need not be implemented
6We consider resource pools with range restricted to the ﬁxedinterval [I0, I1] because
it turns out to be an overly strong condition to require a protocol to be live withoutany
further conditions on the total resource balance, beyond th e fact that it is a function
to R≥0. We wish to be able to talk about Bitcoin as live in the unsized setting, for
example, but liveness will certainly fail if R is the constant 0 function, or if the total
resource balance decreases suﬃciently quickly over time.
explicitly in the blockchain being modeled, and is a mathema ti-
cal abstraction that allows for the discussion and comparis on of
blockchains of very diﬀerent types. It is designed to be as si mple
as possible, subject to this goal.
As described in Section 2.2, we consider each user to be a com-
puting device with access to certain external oracles and fu nction-
alities. At any given timeslot t ∈ D , a user’s state is entirely spec-
iﬁed by the set of public keys they control, the protocol para me-
ters, their message state and the set of permissions they hav e been
given by the permitter oracle O. The protocol P = (I, O) is then
a pair, where the instruction set I is a set of deterministic and eﬃ-
ciently computable instructions, which speciﬁes precisely what ac-
tions honest users should carry out at each timeslot, as a fun ction
of the timeslot and their state at that timeslot. The instruc tions of
the protocol are therefore a function of the timeslot, the ke ys con-
trolled by the user, the protocol parameters, their message state,
and the set of permissions they have been given by the permitt er.
One of the external functionalities each user has is the ability to
broadcast valid messages. Amongst the conditions required for va-
lidity is that the public key responsible for the broadcast h as been
given permission by the permitter oracle O, which is an oracle to
which users have access. We thus suppose that users can make ‘ re-
quests’ to the permitter, of the form(U, M, t ′, A), where U is a public
key under their control, M is a possible downward closed message
state, t ′ is a timeslot, and where A is some (possibly empty) extra
data. Given a request of this form, the permitter may then res pond
by giving them permission to broadcast certain messages. Th e re-
sponse of the permitter to a request (U, M, t ′, A) will be assumed to
be a probabilistic function of the protocol parameters, the actual
timeslot t, the previous requests made by U, the tuple (U, M, t ′, A),
and of the user’s resource level R(U, t ′, M).7
The conditions we have described above non-trivially restr ict
what the permitter can do. For example, consider the unsized set-
ting, and suppose that the total resource pool (e.g., total h ashrate)
cannot be deduced from the protocol parameters, t, previous re-
quests made by U, the tuple (U, M, t ′, A), and the user’s resource
level R(U, t ′, M). In this case, the framework requires that the re-
sponse of the permitter be independent of the total resource pool.
(Whereas in the sized setting, if the total resource pool can be
deduced from the broadcast state M, the permitter is not so con-
strained.)
As we shall discuss later, the form of the permission given by
the permitter might be permission to broadcast a speciﬁc mes sage
(such as the data A proposed by the user in their request), or it
might be permission to broadcast any number of messages sati s-
fying certain criteria (such as any block that extends the me ssage
state at a given location). In what follows we shall consider various
settings, depending on what assumptions can be made about th e
relationship between the permitter and the resource pool.
It should be noted that the roles of the resource pool and the
permitter are diﬀerent in the sense that, while the resourcepool is a
variable (meaning that a given protocol may be expected to be live
and secure with respect to a range of resource pools), the permitter
7Another way to interpret these conditions is that the respon se to a request (or the
probability distribution on that response) should be fully determined by information
known to the user making the request – in practice, users shou ld be able to check for
themselves whether or not they have permission to broadcast .
Andrew Lewis-Pye and Tim Roughgarden
is part of the protocol description (meaning that a protocol is only
required to run relative to a speciﬁc permitter oracle).
2.8 Modeling simple PoW and PoS protocols
For concreteness, we next consider how some simple PoS and PoW
protocols can be modeled using our framework. In this sectio n, we
will give a brief summary. Then in Appendix A, we give more in-
depth examples for Bitcoin and for a ‘generic’ longest chain PoS
protocol. We remind the reader that our goal is not to literal ly
model the step-by-step operation of these protocols, but ra ther
to replicate the essential properties of their user selecti on mech-
anisms with a suitable choice of a permitter oracle.
First, consider a PoW protocol like Bitcoin. To keep things s im-
ple, we’ll initially ignore Bitcoin’s adjustable ‘diﬃcult y parameter’
(i.e., how hard the PoW is to produce); We’ll return to this po int
in Section 6 and Appendix A. To model a simple PoW protocol of
this form, we can consider very short timeslots (say 1 second each,
or even shorter). The resource level (i.e., hashrate) of a us er in a
given timeslot is independent of the message state, so we can re-
strict attention to resource pools R : U × D → R≥0. We interpret
a user request (U, M, t ′, A) in a timeslot t as all of U’s eﬀorts during
timeslot t to extend the message state M.8 (If a user submits more
than one request during a timeslot, the permitter ignores al l but
the ﬁrst.) For example, we can interpret A as a choice and ordering
of transactions within a proposed block, along with a choice of pre-
decessor, with the understanding that the user will try as many dif-
ferent nonces as possible during the timeslot. The permitte r then
gives U permission to broadcast with probability proportional to
R(U, t) (so long as A can be legally added to M).9 A notable feature
of this permitter is that permission is granted for the broad cast
of speciﬁc messages (i.e., a speciﬁc choice of A), rather than for a
collection of messages meeting certain criteria.
There are various ways in which ‘standard’ PoS selection pro -
cesses can work. Let us restrict ourselves, just for now and f or the
purposes of this example, to considering protocols in which the
only broadcast messages are blocks, and let us consider a lon gest
chain PoS protocol which works as follows: For each broadcas t
chain C and for all timeslots in a set T (C), the protocol being mod-
eled selects precisely one public key who is permitted to produce
blocks extendingC (i.e. blocks whose parent is the unique leaf ofC),
with the probability each public key is chosen being proport ional
to their wealth as recorded in C.10 In order to model a protocol of
this form, we can consider a (timeslot-independent) resour ce pool
R : U × M → R≥0, which takes the longest chain C from M,
and allocates to each public key U their wealth according to C.11
8The parameter t ′ is ignored by the permitter, or equivalently is automatical ly inter-
preted as the current timeslot t ; the parameter t ′ is relevant only for PoS protocols.
9For example, with probability R(U, t )/M, where M is a large constant that depends
on the assumed maximum hashrate I1 and the timeslot length.
10Note that being permitted to broadcast a block is not the sameas being instructed by
the protocol to broadcast a block, and does not determine how other users will treat
the block – there are many contexts in which users might be abl e to produce valid
blocks for which broadcast is not instructed by the protocol (e.g., a block extending a
chain other than the longest one). A user may also be permitte d to produce two valid
blocks whose broadcast constitutes an overt deviation from the protocol, and which
might be punished.
11Note that in many PoS protocols the relevant balance is actua lly U’s wealth accord-
ing to some proper initial segment of C , and that in modeling such protocols one
should adjust R accordingly. As mentioned earlier, it is also standard to in sist that
Then we can consider a permitter which chooses one public key
U for each chain C and each timeslot t ′ in T (C), each public key U
being chosen with probability R(U,C)/T (C). (This is well deﬁned
because the total resource pool T is known to the protocol.) That
chosen public key U corresponding to C and t ′, is then given per-
mission to broadcast blocks extending C whenever U makes a re-
quest (U, M, t ′, ∅) for which C is the longest chain in M. A notable
feature of this permitter is that the permission it gives is f or the
broadcast of sets of messages satisfying certain criteria, i.e. when
the permitter gives permission it is for any (otherwise vali d) block
extending a given chain C.
To model a BFT PoS protocol, the basic approach will be very
similar to that described for the longest chain PoS protocol above,
except that certain other signed messages might be now requi red
in M (such as signed votes on blocks) before permission to broad-
cast is granted, and permission may now be given for the broadcast
of messages other than blocks (such as votes on blocks).
We refer the reader to Appendix A for two examples that are
described in greater detail.
3 ADAPTIVITY AND FINALITY
3.1 The extended protocol and the meaning of
probabilistic statements
In order to deﬁne what it means for a protocol to be secure or li ve,
we ﬁrst need a notion of conﬁrmation for blocks, which is a function
C mapping any message state to a chain which is a subset of that
message state, in a manner which depends on an initially deﬁn ed
parameter called the security parameter ε ≥ 0. (E.g., in Bitcoin,
one might consider a block conﬁrmed if six blocks follow it on
the longest chain; changing the “six” to some other number wo uld
yield a diﬀerent notion of conﬁrmation.) The intuition behi nd ε is
that it should upper bound the probability of false conﬁrmat ion.
Given any message state, C returns the set of conﬁrmed blocks.
In Section 2.7, we stipulated that the protocol P = (I, O) is a
pair, where the instruction set I is a set of deterministic and eﬃ-
ciently computable instructions specifying precisely wha t actions
an honest user should carry out at each timeslot, and where O is
the permitter. In general, however, a protocol might only be con-
sidered to run relative to a speciﬁc notion of conﬁrmation C. We
will refer to the triple (I, O, C) as the extended protocol . Often we
shall suppress explicit mention of C, and assume it to be implicitly
attached to a given protocol. We shall talk about a protocol b eing
live, for example, when it is really the extended protocol to which
the deﬁnition applies.
Each execution of the extended protocol is then entirely det er-
mined by:
(1) The parameters;
(2) The set of users and their public keys;
(3) An index specifying the program executed by the adversary;
(4) The resource pool (which may or may not be undetermined);
(5) The set of asynchronous timeslots;
U has been recorded as a public key with non-zero stake for a min imum number of
timeslots.
Resource Pools and the CAP Theorem
(6) Certain events on which probability distributions are e stab-
lished, including permitter responses and message deliver y
times.
Generally, when we discuss an extended protocol, we shall doso
within the context of a setting, which constrains the set of possible
choices for (1)-(6) above. The setting might specify the pro bability
distribution on delivery times, for example, and might rest rict the
set of resource pools to those in which the adversary is given a
limited resource balance. When we make a probabilistic stat ement
to the eﬀect that a certain condition holds with at most/leas t a cer-
tain probability, this means that the probabilisitic bound holds for
all possible values of (1)-(5) above that are not made explic it in the
statement, and which are consistent with the setting.
3.2 Liveness and adaptivity
In order to deﬁne liveness for a protocol with a notion of conﬁ r-
mation C, let |C(M)| denote the number of blocks in C(M) for any
message state M. For a given U , and timeslots t1 < t2, let Mi be
U ’s message state at ti . Let us say that [t1, t2] is a growth interval
for U , if |C(M2)| > |C(M1)|.
Deﬁnition 3.1. A protocol is live if, for every choice of security
parameter ε > 0, there exists ℓε such that the following holds with
probability at least 1 − ε for any timeslots t1 < t2 ∈ D , and for any
user U : If t2 −t1 ≥ ℓε and [t1, t2] is entirely synchronous, then [t1, t2]
is a growth interval for U .
So, roughly speaking, a protocol is live if the number of conﬁ rmed
blocks can be relied on to grow over time during synchronous
intervals of suﬃcient length. Note also, that while Deﬁniti on 3.1
only refers explicitly to protocols, it is really the extended protocol
to which the deﬁnition applies. In order to properly underst and
Deﬁnition 3.1, we refer the reader to the conventions concer ning
the meaning of probabilistic assertions that were describe d in Sec-
tion 3.1. Generally, assertions of liveness and security will be made
within the conﬁnes of a particular setting, which might restrict the
probability distribution on message delivery times, or lim it the re-
source balance of the adversary (but is otherwise worst-cas e sub-
ject to these constraints).
In order to digest Deﬁnition 3.1, it is useful to understand w hy
it should be satisﬁed by a protocol like Bitcoin. Suppose we m odel
Bitcoin in the unsized and synchronous setting. According t o Sec-
tion 2.6, this means that we assume the existence of a ﬁxed interval
[I0, I1] such that I0 > 0, I1 > I0, and such that the total resource bal-
ance always takes values in [I0, I1]. Let us suppose that we model
Bitcoin and the permitter as discussed in Section 2.8 – again , for
the sake of simplicity, we’ll forget about the fact that Bitcoin makes
adjustments to the ‘diﬃculty’. Suppose also that, as part of the set-
ting, we assume:
(A) The adversary only ever controls a suitably small propor -
tion of the total resource balance, and;
(B) The probability distribution on the length of time for me s-
sage delivery is such that the probability of delivery failu re
tends to 0 as the time after broadcast tends to ∞.
In order for a block B to be conﬁrmed, C requires that it should be-
long to the longest chain in M and be followed by x many blocks,
where the value of x is a function of the security parameter ε and
the assumed restriction on the adversary’s resource balanc e. Sup-
pose that, at a given timeslot t, C is the longest chain seen by U .
Since we assume that the total resource balance always belon gs to
[I0, I1], this allows us to ﬁnd ℓ∗ε (independent of t and C) such that
the following holds with probability > 1 − ε/2: Some honest user
with public key U′ is permitted to broadcast a new block at a times-
lot before t + ℓ∗ε , but after all blocks in C have been delivered to
them. In order to specify the value ℓϵ whose existence is required
by Deﬁntion 3.1, we can then deﬁne ℓε > ℓ ∗ε such that, with prob-
ability > 1 − ε/2, the block broadcast by U′ will be delivered to U
by timeslot t + ℓε . It then holds with probability > 1 − ε that the
longest chain (and hence the number of conﬁrmed blocks) seen by
U at t + ℓε is of length greater than |C |.
Now that we have deﬁned liveness, we can also deﬁne adaptiv-
ity:
Deﬁnition 3.2. We deﬁne a protocol to be adaptive if it is live in
the unsized setting.
3.3 Security and ﬁnality
Roughly speaking, security requires that conﬁrmed blocks normally
belong to the same chain. Let us say that two distinct blocks a re
incompatible if neither is an ancestor of the other, and compatible
otherwise. If B ∈ C(M) where M is the message state of U at time
t, then we shall say that B is conﬁrmed for U at t.
Deﬁnition 3.3. A protocol is secure if the following holds for ev-
ery choice of security parameter ε > 0, for every U1, U2 and for all
timeslots t1, t2 in the duration: With probability > 1 − ε, all blocks
which are conﬁrmed for U1 at t1 are compatible with all those which
are conﬁrmed for U2 at t2.
Deﬁnition 3.4. A protocol has ﬁnality if it is secure in the partially
synchronous setting.
Note that BFT protocols such as Algorand are normally designed
to have ﬁnality in this sense. For Algorand, the duration and adver-
sary resource bound are initially speciﬁed as parameters, a nd then
the protocol speciﬁes committee sizes and other quantities so that
the probability two incompatible blocks will ever be conﬁrm ed is
less than ε.
4 THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF ADAPTIVITY AND
FINALITY
In Section 2.7, we didn’t describe any conditions requiring that the
behaviour of the permitter must be inﬂuenced by the resource pool.
The only assumption of this kind that we shall make is stated below,
and will be applied for both the sized and unsized settings.
No balance, no voice : No U will be given permis-
sion to broadcast messages in response to a request
(U, M, t, A) for which R(U, t, M) = 0.
Now that the framework and all required deﬁnitions are in place,
we can formally prove Theorem 4.1.
T/h.sc/e.sc/o.sc/r.sc/e.sc/m.sc 4.1.No protocol is both adaptive and has ﬁnality.
As stated previously, this theorem can be seen as an analog of
the CAP Theorem [12] from distributed computing for our blockchain
protocol analysis framework. Now that we have formally deﬁn ed
Andrew Lewis-Pye and Tim Roughgarden
adaptivity, ﬁnality, security, and liveness, it may be usef ul to say
a little more about the relationship to the CAP Theorem. Whil e
the CAP Theorem asserts that (under the threat of unbounded n et-
work partitions), no protocol can be both available and cons istent,
it is possible for BFT protocols such as Algorand to be both li ve
and secure in the partially synchronous setting . This is possible be-
cause liveness is a fundamentally weaker property than avai labil-
ity: Liveness does not require new conﬁrmed blocks to be produced
during extended periods of asynchrony. For example, Algora nd is
live, even though block production may stop during network p ar-
titions. The key idea behind the proof of Theorem 4.1 is that, in
the unsized (and partially synchronous) setting, this fund amental
diﬀerence disappears, with network partitions indistingu ishable
from waning resource pools. Liveness then forces the existe nce
of growth intervals during network partitions. In the unsiz ed and
partially synchronous setting, security and liveness thus become
incompatible, just as consistency and availability are inc ompatible
according to the CAP Theorem.
P/r.sc/o.sc/o.sc/f.sc.(of Theorem 4.1) The idea behind the proof can be summed
up as follows. We consider executions of the protocol in whic h
there are at least two users, both of which are honest, and who
control public keys U0 and U1 respectively. Suppose that, in an ex-
ecution of the protocol in the unsized and partially synchro nous
setting, U0 and U1 both have the same constant and non-zero re-
source balance, and that all other users have resource balan ce zero
throughout the duration. According to the assumption ‘no balance,
no vote’, this means that U0 and U1 will be the only public keys
which are able to broadcast messages. For as long as the adver sary
is able to prevent messages broadcast by each Ui from being deliv-
ered to U1−i (i ∈ { 0, 1}), the execution will be indistinguishable,
as far as Ui is concerned, from one in which only Ui has the same
constant and non-zero resource balance. The fact that the pr oto-
col is live means that, with high probability, U0 and U1 will see
conﬁrmed blocks within a bounded period of time. The conﬁrme d
blocks for U0 will be incompatible with those for U1, so long as
these conﬁrmed blocks appear before any point at which a mes-
sage broadcast by Ui has been delivered to U1−i for some i ∈ { 0, 1}.
This contradicts security for the protocol in the partially synchro-
nous setting.
To describe the argument in more detail, let U0 and U1 be public
keys controlled by diﬀerent honest users. For a duration D which
is suﬃciently long, we consider three diﬀerent resource poo ls:
R0 : We let R0 assign the constant value I > 0 to both U0 and U1
over the entire duration, while all other users are assigned
the constant value 0.
R1 : We let R1 assign the constant valueI to U0 over the entire du-
ration, while all other users are assigned the constant valu e
0.
R2 : We let R2 assign the constant valueI to U1 over the entire du-
ration, while all other users are assigned the constant valu e
0.
We consider three diﬀerent executions of the protocol with t he
same parameters, for the unsized setting in which the resour ce
pool is an undetermined variable:
Ex0 : Here R := R0. All timeslots are asynchronous and the ad-
versary prevents the delivery of messages broadcast by Ui
to the user controlling U1−i , for i ∈ { 0, 1}.
Ex1 : Here R := R1, and we work in the synchronous setting (or
in the partially synchronous setting, but without interfer -
ence by the adversary).
Ex2 : Here R := R2, and we work in the synchronous setting.
According to the assumption of ‘no balance, no voice’, it follows
that only U0 and U1 will be able to broadcast messages in any of
these three executions. Our framework stipulates that the i nstruc-
tions of the protocol for a given user at a given timeslot must be a
deterministic function of the protocol parameters, the timeslot, the
keys controlled by the user, their message state and the set o f per-
missions they have been given by the permitter (see Section 2 .7).
It also stipulates that the response of the permitter to a req uest
(U, M, t ′, A) is a probabilistic function of the protocol parameters,
the actual timeslot t, previous requests made by U, the request
(U, M, t ′, A), and the user’s resource level R(U, t ′, M). It therefore
follows by induction on timeslots that, because the resourc e pool
is undetermined:
(†) For each i ∈ { 0, 1}, and for all timeslots in Ex0, the probabil-
ity distribution on the state of the user controlling Ui is iden-
tical to the corresponding distribution at the same timeslo t
in Ex1+i .
If the protocol is adaptive, then it follows from Deﬁnition 3 .1 that
we can ﬁnd a timeslot t0 satisfying the following condition: In both
Ex1+i (i ∈ { 0, 1}), it holds with probability > 3/4 that there is at
least one block which is conﬁrmed for Ui at t0. By (†) it then holds
for Ex0, and for each i ∈ { 0, 1}, that with probability > 3/4 there
is at least one block which is conﬁrmed for Ui at t0. We stipulated
in Section 2.4 that no block B can be broadcast by U := Miner(B) at
a point strictly prior to that at which its parent has been del ivered
to U. It follows that in Ex0 all blocks which are conﬁrmed for Ui
must be incompatible with all blocks which are conﬁrmed for U1−i .
The deﬁnition of security therefore fails to hold for timeslot t0, and
with respect to the security parameter 1/2. □
5 PROOF-OF-STAKE REQUIRES
MULTI-PERMITTERS
One major diﬀerence between typical PoW and PoS longest-cha in
protocols (e.g., Bitcoin vs. Snow White) is the order of oper ations
between a user choosing a proposed block to broadcast and lea rn-
ing whether or not it has permission to broadcast. In the domi nant
PoW protocols, the proposed block is chosen ﬁrst, and only th en
is permission granted or denied; in typical longest-chain P oS pro-
tocols, permission (to broadcast in a given timeslot at a giv en lo-
cation) is granted before the speciﬁc block to broadcast is c hosen.
Is this diﬀerence an artefact of the protocols developed thu s far, or
is it a more fundamental distinction between PoW and non-PoW
protocols? We next use our framework to reason about this que s-
tion.
Already from the simple examples in Section 2.8, one can see
that the standard PoW and PoS protocols are best modeled by pe r-
mitters and resource pools with quite diﬀerent properties. The per-
mitter which we described in modeling the PoS case, for examp le,
was able to ensure that a single user would be given permissio n to
Resource Pools and the CAP Theorem
extend a particular chain at a particular timeslot, simply because it
has access to the total resource balance recorded by a given c hain.
As alluded to above, another notable diﬀerence is that the permitter
we described for the PoW case gave permission for the broadca st
of speciﬁc messages, rather than for sets of messages satisfying cer-
tain criteria (and of size larger than 1). We shall refer to pe rmitters
of this type as single-permitters, as opposed to multi-permitters.
A key factor in determining whether multi-permitting is inh er-
ent to non-PoW protocols is the number of possible blocks ext end-
ing a given chain C—by the ‘possible’ extensions of a chain C, we
mean those blocks B satisfying all conditions required for validity
other than being permitted by the permitter oracle. If the nu mber
of possible extensions is large, while the probability that the per-
mitter gives permission for each is small, then a user may be a ble
to increase their probability of gaining permission to broa dcast
a block by churning through as many requests as possible. Thi s
means that the probability of success comes to depend on comp u-
tational power, rendering the protocol (at least partially ) PoW.
In order to see this more precisely, we need a precise way to talk
about the computational power of a user. So, for the purposes of
this discussion, let us say that the computational power of a user is
the number of requests they are capable of making to the permitter
in each timeslot. We’ll denote the computational power of U by XU.
In order to restrict to realistic scenarios, we’ll suppose t hat there
is some ﬁxed upper bound Xmax, for which we always have XU ≤
Xmax. Suppose that, at a given timeslot t, C is the longest chain,
and, for the sake of simplicity, suppose that C has been seen by all
users. Suppose further that the following conditions are sa tisﬁed:
(†1) The permitter O is a single-permitter. More speciﬁcally, letΛ
be the set of requests of the form (U, C, t, B), such that B is a
possible extension of C. There exists some λ > 0, such that
O will respond to each distinct request in Λ made during
timeslot t, by giving permission to broadcast the speciﬁc
block B with independent probability λ · R( U, t, C).
(†2) For some constant ExtNo, there are ExtNo many possible
extensions of C for each U. Each U submits min{XU, ExtNo}
many requests from Λ (and only those) during timeslot t.
Let pU be the probability that U is given permission to broadcast
during timeslot t. In what follows, it will simplify calculations to
consider what happens in the limit of the size of the network o f
users: We shall say that a given condition holds in the limit , if it
holds so long as pU is suﬃciently small for all U. We’ll say that one
quantity x is proportional to another quantity/y.altin the limit, if there
exists some constant c such that, for each ϵ > 0, x/c/y.alt∈ (1−ϵ, 1+ϵ)
in the limit.
Proposition 5.1 below says that, when the number of possible
extensions ExtNo is larger than Xmax, the single-permitter O au-
tomatically gives rise to a PoW protocol, since, in the limit , the
probability U is given permission to broadcast is then proportional
to U’s computational power. While Proposition 5.1 works accord -
ing to the speciﬁc assumption that the permitter responds to each
request with independent probability, it should be clear th at the
basic principle holds under much more general conditions.
P/r.sc/o.sc/p.sc/o.sc/s.sc/i.sc/t.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc 5.1.Suppose that (†1) and (†2) above are satisﬁed,
so that O is a single permitter, and each U submits min {XU, ExtNo}
many requests during timeslot t. Let pU be the probability that U is
given permission to broadcast during timeslot t. In the limit, pU is
proportional to R(U, t, C) · min{XU, ExtNo}.
P/r.sc/o.sc/o.sc/f.sc.Deﬁne YU := min{XU, ExtNo}, so that U makes YU many
requests during timeslot t. If YU = 0 then pU = 0 and R(U, t, C) ·
YU = 0. So suppose otherwise. Let λ be as deﬁned in (†1). Then
the probability that at least one of the YU many requests made by
U results in permission to broadcast is 1 − (1 − λ · R( U, t, C))YU. It
therefore suﬃces to show that:
1 − (1 − λ · R( U, t, C))YU
λ · R( U, t, C) · YU
→ 1 in the limit.
This can be shown with a straightforward analysis. Expandin g out
(1 − λ · R( U, t, C))YU:
(1 − λ · R( U, t, C))YU = 1 − λ · R( U, t, C) · YU +
1
2YU(YU − 1)(λ · R( U, t, C))2 −
1
6YU(YU − 1)(YU − 2)(λ · R( U, t, C))3 + · · ·
We therefore have:
1 − (1 − λ · R( U, t, C))YU
λ · R( U, t, C) · YU
= 1 − (YU − 1) · λ · R( U, t, C)
2 +
(YU − 1)(YU − 2)(λ · R( U, t, C))2
6 + · · · .
Now, since YU > 0, we have λ · R(U, t, C) ≤ pU, so that λ · R(U, t, C)
must tend to zero as pU tends to 0. Since YU is always less than
the ﬁxed bound Xmax, the r.h.s. of (1) therefore tends to 1 in the
limit. □
In a standard PoS protocol, for example, one usually runs the
lotteries choosing users to produce blocks by having users h ash
their public key, or some signed message, together with the t imes-
lot identiﬁer and a frequently updated ‘random seed’. If the result-
ing hash (considered as a real number) is the lowest produced , or
if it is below a threshold that depends on their stake, then that user
might be allowed to produce the next block. If one wanted the p er-
mission to broadcast to be block-speciﬁc, one could require users
to enter each proposed block as an extra input to the hash. Doi ng
so would mean that users who intend to produce blocks are now
incentivised to churn through many diﬀerent possibilities for the
block as entry to the hash. So the resulting protocol becomes a
PoS/PoW hybrid.
In principle, however, and in situations where less possibi lities
are required for each block, one certainly can envisage prot ocols
which use single-permitters, and which could be implemente d us-
ing PoS. As a simplistic example, we might consider a protoco l
which is aimed at recording the time of a particular event. At each
in a sequence of short timeslots, a single user might be selec ted
and given permission of one of two forms. Either:
(a) They are given permission to broadcast a block recording
that, “The event has happened by this timeslot”, or;
(b) They are given permission to broadcast a block recording
that, “The event is yet to take place”.
To ensure single-permitting, the parent of the block should also
be speciﬁed as part of the permission (e.g., with permission being
given for diﬀerent parents in some rotating fashion). Hones t users
Andrew Lewis-Pye and Tim Roughgarden
are then asked to broadcast the permitted block only in the ca se
that the information recorded by the block and all ancestors is cor-
rect. Such a protocol can be implemented using PoS, and the sm all
number of possibilities for each block means that one can do s o
without degenerating into a PoW protocol.
6 DISCUSSION
6.1 Deﬁning ﬁnality
The term ‘ﬁnality’ is sometimes used to mean the absolute guaran-
tee that blocks of transactions will not be revoked once comm itted
to the blockchain with a suitable level of conﬁrmation. We have de-
ﬁned a diﬀerent (probabilistic) notion of ﬁnality, and have argued
that it can be eﬀectively applied to the categorisation and a nalysis
of blockchain protocols. It may be instructive, however, to further
examine whether the former informal notion – let’s call it abso-
lute ﬁnality – is likely to be useful for the analysis of blockchain
protocols.
To make things concrete, let us consider the case of Algorand .
For the purposes of this discussion, all one needs to know abo ut
Algorand is that block conﬁrmation revolves around the sele ction
of committees, and that the protocol relies for its security on the
idea that an adversary with suitably bounded stake will never have
a committee majority.12 Under appropriate modeling assumptions,
one can show that the chance of the adversary gaining a committee
majority at any point during the predetermined duration of t he
protocol is indeed negligible. Since the process of selecti ng users
to be committee members is probabilistic, however, it certa inly is
possible that there will exist committees controlled entirely by the
adversary. At a given moment in time it could turn out to be the
case, even if only with negligible probability, that a number of prior
committees have actually had dishonest majorities, and are now
providing conﬁrmation for an alternative blockchain. So Algorand
fails to have absolute ﬁnality as a simple consequence of the fact
that certain aspects of the process are best modeled as probabilistic.
The question then becomes, is it meaningful in a blockchain con-
text to worry about the distinction between an event which occurs
with probability which is essentially 0, and an event which holds
with probability exactly 0? While it might be possible for a commit-
tee to have a dishonest majority, how much does this matter if the
probability is < 10−10 that this occurs at any time during the execu-
tion of the protocol? We take the position that if a permissio nless
protocol achieves absolute ﬁnality given appropriate mode ling as-
sumptions (such as the security of elliptic curve cryptogra phy, or
the fact that a given hash function is collision resistant),then it still
holds with non-zero probability that some aspect of the mode ling
assumptions fails to hold. So the distinction is really a mat ter of
where one hides the probability of failure.
6.2 Does ﬁnality matter?
The extent to which protocol ﬁnality is important is an inter esting
question. We have deﬁned ﬁnality here so as to be most useful f or
classiﬁcation purposes. The notion of ﬁnality that we consi der re-
quires being secure in the face of unbounded periods of netwo rk
12In fact, never more than a third of any given committee.
failure; one might argue that this is overkill in practice. F or exam-
ple, one relaxation would require only that a protocol be sec ure in
the face of realistically bounded periods of network failure; this, in
turn, may allow for greater protocol adaptivity.
Let us explore this idea further in the context of Bitcoin. In Sec-
tion 2.8, we considered how to model a PoW protocol that was a
simpliﬁed version of Bitcoin, in the sense that we did not con sider
the updates to the ‘diﬃculty parameter’ that are implemente d ev-
ery couple of weeks in Bitcoin. Now that we have formally deﬁned
security and adaptivity, we can consider in more detail what dif-
ferences are caused by these updates to the diﬃculty parameter. In
fact, Bitcoin is normally considered to be executed with a no tion
of conﬁrmation which is particularly insensitive to the diﬃ culty
parameter – a block is considered conﬁrmed once it belongs to the
longest chain and is followed by a ﬁxed number of blocks (six b e-
ing a common choice). According to this notion of conﬁrmatio n,
network partitions of a few hours may suﬃce to produce a situa -
tion in which diﬀerent blocks are conﬁrmed for diﬀerent user s. If
one wants to avoid this, one response is to consider the same p ro-
tocol paired with a notion of conﬁrmation that requires bloc ks to
be produced at a certain rate. For example, one might consider a
block to be conﬁrmed if it belongs to the longest chain and is f ol-
lowed by x ≥ 6 many blocks, which have been produced in less
than x/5.5 many hours. The Bitcoin protocol with this notion of
conﬁrmation is still adaptive, but the network partitionin g attack
described in the proof of Theorem 4.1 would now have to be car-
ried out over a considerably extended interval of time. One m ight
argue that such extended network partitions are unlikely, and that,
realistically speaking, adaptivity (even if slow) is likel y to be bene-
ﬁcial in ensuring liveness.
7 CONCLUDING REMARKS
Our main aim in this paper has been to establish a framework fo r
analysing permissionless blockchain protocols that blackboxes the
precise mechanics of the user selection process. Establish ing such
a framework allows us to prove impossibility results, and to iso-
late the properties of the selection process which are signi ﬁcant
in the sense that they impact the way in which the protocol mus t
be designed, or inﬂuence properties of the resulting protoc ol, such
as security in a range of settings. We have focussed on the diﬀ er-
ence between the sized and unsized settings, and have shown t hat
the choice of setting is intimately related to a fundamental trade-
oﬀ for cryptocurrency protocols: A protocol cannot deliver ﬁnal-
ity for block conﬁrmations while at the same time being adapt ive.
The formal dichotomy which results can be seen as elucidatin g
the informal division of permissionless blockchain protoc ols into
those which are longest chain type protocols such as Bitcoin on
the one hand, and those protocols such as Algorand, Casper FF G
[5] or proof-of-stake (PoS) implementations of Tendermint or Hot-
stuﬀ on the other, which work by importing traditional Byzan tine-
Fault-Tolerant protocols from the permissioned to the perm ission-
less setting.
In the description of the framework presented here, explicit men-
tion was made of an adversary who displays byzantine behavio ur.
The expectation is that properties of protocols are asserted modulo
the existence of a bounded adversary. So assertions of liveness and
Resource Pools and the CAP Theorem
security are made in a setting with explicit bounds on the adv er-
sary, and the requirement is that the protocol should behave well
irrespective of the behaviour of the adversary, within the g iven
bounds. This is an entirely standard form of analysis in the d is-
tributed computing literature. There is a general understa nding in
the blockchain community, however, that in the blockchain setting
there is also the need for a deeper game-theoretic analysis, which
takes account of user incentives. It is not enough that the pr otocol
should perform well given arbitrary behaviour from the adve rsary.
Given arbitrary behaviour by the adversary, it should also b e the
case that the instructions of the protocol constitute something like
a Nash equilibrium for the honest users. It would be interest ing to
use and expand our framework in order to achieve impossibili ty
results along these lines.
As well as allowing for impossibility results, a beneﬁt of ou r
framework may also be in providing some modularity for the de -
scription and analysis of protocols. For example, the descr iption
of PoS protocols tends really to consist of two components. O ne
has to describe how lotteries are to be implemented securely , so as
to provide an appropriate mechanism for user selection, and then
one has to describe the protocol to be carried out by users who are
selected to update the state. Once a mechanism for orchestra ting
lotteries has been agreed on (such as that used in Algorand), one
might then want to describe a range of protocols, which work very
diﬀerently from each other, but which use the same basic meth od
of user selection. Or one might want to describe a protocol th at
uses the same method of user selection as Algorand, but which
could be updated to use another method of user selection shou ld
something superior be developed later. Blackboxing the pro cess of
user selection via the use of permitters may therefore allow for a
more modular description and analysis.
A further avenue for research would be to use the framework
we have described here to formalize another notable diﬀeren ce be-
tween protocols which are adaptive and protocols which have ﬁ-
nality, which concerns the nature of ‘proof of conﬁrmation’ . For
BFT protocols, it will generally be the case that the very exi stence
of a certain set of signed objects may suﬃce to establish conﬁ rma-
tion with high probability. For example, in Algorand, the existence
of a block, together with an appropriate set of committee sig na-
tures establishing consensus for inclusion of the block, is suﬃcient
to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the block can be considered
conﬁrmed. For Bitcoin and other adaptive protocols, on the o ther
hand, a user will only believe that a certain chain is the long est
until they are shown a longer chain. For the adaptive protoco ls, in
other words, one needs to see a user’s full message state in or der
to know whether they consider a given block to be conﬁrmed. Fo r
protocols with ﬁnality, by contrast, certain sets of publications will
constitute proof of conﬁrmation, simply by virtue of being a subset
of a user’s state. We suspect that there are interesting inte ractions
with the resource setting to be explored in this regard.
REFERENCES
[1] Iddo Bentov, Rafael Pass, and Elaine Shi. 2016. Snow Whit e: Provably Secure
Proofs of Stake. IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive 2016, 919 (2016).
[2] Jonah Brown-Cohen, Arvind Narayanan, Alexandros Psoma s, and S Matthew
Weinberg. 2019. Formal barriers to longest-chain proof-of -stake protocols. In
Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Conference on Economics and Compu tation. 459–
473.
[3] Ethan Buchman, Jae Kwon, and Zarko Milosevic. 2018. The l atest gossip on BFT
consensus. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.04938 (2018).
[4] Vitalik Buterin. 2018. What is Ethereum? Ethereum Oﬃcial webpage. A vailable:
http://www. ethdocs. org/en/latest/introduction/what- is-ethereum. html. Accessed
14 (2018).
[5] Vitalik Buterin and Virgil Griﬃth. 2017. Casper the frie ndly ﬁnality gadget.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.09437 (2017).
[6] Miguel Castro and Barbara Liskov. 2002. Practical Byzan tine fault tolerance and
proactive recovery. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems (TOCS) 20, 4 (2002),
398–461.
[7] Miguel Castro, Barbara Liskov, et al. 1999. Practical By zantine fault tolerance.
In OSDI, Vol. 99. 173–186.
[8] Jing Chen and Silvio Micali. 2016. Algorand. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.01341
(2016).
[9] Christian Decker and Roger Wattenhofer. 2013. Informat ion propagation in the
bitcoin network. In IEEE P2P 2013 Proceedings . IEEE, 1–10.
[10] Cynthia Dwork, Nancy A. Lynch, and Larry Stockmeyer. 19 88. Consensus in
the Presence of Partial Synchrony. J. ACM 35, 2 (1988), 288–323.
[11] Juan A. Garay, Aggelos Kiayias, and Nikos Leonardos. 20 15. The Bitcoin Back-
bone Protocol: Analysis and Applications. In Proceedings of EUROCRYPT . 281–
310. Revised, June 2020.
[12] Seth Gilbert and Nancy Lynch. 2002. Brewer’s conjectur e and the feasibility
of consistent, available, partition-tolerant web service s. Acm Sigact News 33, 2
(2002), 51–59.
[13] Lucianna Kiﬀer, Rajmohan Rajaraman, and abhi shelat. 2 018. A better method
to analyze blockchain consistency. In ACM CCS 2018.
[14] Leslie Lamport, Robert Shostak, and Marshall Pease. 20 19. The Byzantine gen-
erals problem. In Concurrency: the Works of Leslie Lamport . 203–226.
[15] Nancy A Lynch. 1996. Distributed algorithms. Elsevier.
[16] Satoshi Nakamoto. 2019. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Technical
Report. Manubot.
[17] Rafael Pass, Lior Seeman, and abhi shelat. 2016. Analys is of the Blockchain
Protocol in Asynchronous Networks. eprint.iacr.org/2016 /454.
[18] Marshall Pease, Robert Shostak, and Leslie Lamport. 19 80. Reaching agreement
in the presence of faults. Journal of the ACM (JACM) 27, 2 (1980), 228–234.
[19] Yonatan Sompolinsky and Aviv Zohar. 2015. Secure high- rate transaction pro-
cessing in Bitcoin. In Proceedings of Financial Cryptography and Data Security .
507–âĂŞ527.
[20] Yonatan Sompolinsky and Aviv Zohar. 2015. Secure high- rate transaction pro-
cessing in bitcoin. In International Conference on Financial Cryptography and
Data Security. Springer, 507–527.
[21] Maofan Yin, Dahlia Malkhi, Michael K Reiter, Guy Golan G ueta, and Ittai Abra-
ham. 2018. Hotstuﬀ: Bft consensus in the lens of blockchain. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.05069 (2018).
8 APPENDIX A – TWO MODELING
EXAMPLES
In Section 2.8 we already considered how to model PoW and PoS
protocols. The idea of this appendix is just to ﬂesh those details out
a little. In particular, we previously ignored Bitcoin’s adjustable dif-
ﬁculty parameter, and we will now drop that simplifying assu mp-
tion.
8.1 Modeling Bitcoin
We will assume that the reader is entirely familiar with the B it-
coin protocol, the conditions for block validity, and so on. In order
to decide how to model Bitcoin, we just have to specify how the
timeslots, the resource pool R and the permitter O are deﬁned. We
consider these in order.
To model Bitcoin, we can use very short timeslots (say 1 secon d
each, or even shorter). The exact length of timeslots does no t mat-
ter very much, but we will be assuming that each public key onl y
attempts to mine at most one block in each timeslot. So the shorter
timeslots are, the weaker this assumption becomes. We also w ant
timeslots to be suﬃciently short that any given miner is unli kely
to produce a block in any single given timeslot. For the sake of con-
creteness, let us ﬁx timeslots at 1 second each. Then deﬁning the
resource pool R is also simple. The resource level (i.e., hashrate) of
Andrew Lewis-Pye and Tim Roughgarden
a user in a given timeslot is independent of the message state , so
we can restrict attention to resource pools R : U × D → R≥0. The
value R(U, t) is the hashrate (i.e. hashes per second) of the public
key U during timeslot t, i.e. the number of hashes per second that
the user U , who controls the key U, executes in attempting to mine
a block with U speciﬁed as the miner.
Our main task is therefore to determine how the permitter func-
tions. As described in Section 2.8, we interpret a user request (U, M, t, A)
made during timeslot t as all of U’s eﬀorts during timeslot t to mine
a new block (or, rather, all of the eﬀorts that the owner U makes
on behalf of the public key U). If U submits more than one request
during a timeslot, the permitter ignores all but the ﬁrst. In order
for the permitter to give a positive response, we suppose tha t A
must be an otherwise valid 13 block extending the longest chain in
M. If this condition is satisﬁed then the probability that the per-
mitter gives a positive response will depend on U’s hashrate, but
will also depend on the adjustable diﬃculty level. We model the ad-
justable diﬃculty level with a real valued function p(M). So upon
receiving the request above, and when all other conditions f or a
positive response that we have already listed are satisﬁed, O now
gives permission to broadcast A with probability:
min{p(M) · R( U, t), 1}.
In order to complete our description of the permitter, it the refore
remains to specify how p(M) is determined. Of course, this has
to work in essentially the same way as Bitcoin: p(M) will be the
last in a sequence of real number values p1, p2, . . . that is updated
every 2016 blocks along the longest chain in M. Recall that the
diﬃculty level is adjusted to try and maintain block product ion at
a rate of one block every 10 minutes ( = 600 seconds) on average
and that, initially, the diﬃculty level in Bitcoin required a hash
ending with 32 zeros. So we start with p1 = 1
600·232 . Every 2016
blocks (working along the longest chain in M), a production time
Ti (in seconds) for the ith sequence of 2016 blocks is determined
from the block timestamps. Then, subject to certain caveats listed
below, we deﬁne:
pi +1 = pi · Ti
2016 × 600 .
The caveat to the deﬁnition of pi +1 above is that, to stop the dif-
ﬁculty level changing too quickly, Bitcoin speciﬁes that pi +1 can
change by at most a factor 4 at a time, i.e. that pi +1 must belong
to [ 1
4pi , 4pi ]. So, in line with Bitcoin, if the deﬁnition of pi +1 above
gives a value x outside this interval [ 1
4pi , 4pi ], then we deﬁne pi +1
to be whichever of 1
4pi and 4pi is closest to x.
The reader may notice that the ﬁxed interval [I0, I1], which is
described in Section 2.6 as being a signiﬁcant part of the und erly-
ing assumptions for the unsized setting, does not explicitl y feature
in our description of the model for Bitcoin. The existence of this
interval does become signiﬁcant, however, once one tries pr oving
liveness for the extended protocol.
13I.e., valid in all senses except that it has not yet been permi tted for broadcast by O.
8.2 Modeling a ‘generic’ longest chain PoS
protocol
Rather than deal with the idiosyncrasies of any particular w ell
known PoS protocol, for the sake of simplicity we will consid er
how to model a ‘generic’ longest chain PoS protocol, for which the
only broadcast messages are blocks. Since we already descri bed
roughly how to model protocols of this form in Section 2.8, th e
point of this section is just to examine in more detail how cho ices
in the protocol deﬁnition will be reﬂected in the model.
Most PoS protocols already consider explicit timeslots, an d al-
low for the addition of one new block to the longest chain for e ach
timeslot. So we will consider a protocol which comes with exp lic-
itly deﬁned timeslots of this form, and we will assume that ea ch
block B comes with a corresponding timeslot t(B) – we will also
refer to t(B) as the timestamp for B. For the sake of concreteness
we will suppose that each timeslot is 30 seconds long. We assu me
that, at each timeslot, the protocol directs honest users to try and
extend the longest chain. In order to determine our model, we are
left to specify how R and the permitter O should be deﬁned.
First of all, let us consider R. Of course, the basic idea with a
PoS protocol is that the resource pool should reﬂect a public key’s
stake in the currency. In order to model a protocol of this for m,
we can therefore consider a timeslot-independent resource pool
R : U × M → R≥0, which takes the longest chain CM from
M, and allocates to each public key U a resource balance which
is determined by the information recorded in CM . Precisely how
this resource balance should be determined from CM will, how-
ever, depend on the particular details of the protocol. Let t(CM )
be the timestamp of the leaf of CM . It is standard practice in PoS
protocols to require that, if a user is to produce a block whic h
extends CM , then they should have a non-zero stake in the cur-
rency at some timestamp t which is signiﬁcantly less than t(CM ).
For the sake of concreteness, let us suppose that the protoco l we
are modelling considers the relevant balance to be that at ti meslot
t ∗ := max{t(CM ) − 1 hour, 0}. Then we deﬁne R(U, M) to be U’s
stake at timeslot t ∗, as recorded in CM .
Next, let us consider the permitter O. Again, the precise details
as to how we deﬁne O will depend on the protocol being modeled.
It is fairly common for PoS protocols to specify that blocks c an-
not have parents which are too much older than they are. So, fo r
the sake of concreteness, let us suppose that the protocol we are
modeling requires that each block B must have a parent whose
timestamp is at most an hour earlier than t(B) in order to be valid.
Deﬁne T (CM ) := {t | t ∈ ( t(CM ), t(CM ) + 1 hour]}. Let us sup-
pose that, for each t ∈ T (CM ), the protocol being modeled selects
precisely one public key who is permitted to produce blocks e x-
tending CM (i.e. blocks whose parent is the unique leaf of C and
with timestamp t), with the probability each public key U is cho-
sen being proportional to R(U, M). In this case, we can simply con-
sider a permitter which chooses one public key U for each chain
C and each timeslot t ∈ T (C), each public key U being chosen
with probability R(U, C)/T (C). This is permissable because the to-
tal resource pool T is a predetermined variable. That chosen public
key U corresponding to C and t, is then given permission to broad-
cast blocks extending C whenever U makes a request (U, M, t, ∅) for
which C = CM , i.e., for which C is the longest chain in M.