
=== PAGE 1 ===
PHANTOM GHOSTDAG
A Scalable Generalization of Nakamoto Consensus
November 10, 2021
Yonatan Sompolinsky
yoni_sompo@cs.huji.ac.il
School of Engineering and Computer
Science, The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Israel
Shai Wyborski
shaide@cs.huji.ac.il
School of Engineering and Computer
Science, The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Israel
Aviv Zohar
avivz@cs.huji.ac.il
School of Engineering and Computer
Science, The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Israel
ABSTRACT
In 2008 Satoshi Nakamoto invented the basis for blockchain-based
distributed ledgers. The core concept of this system is an open
and anonymous network of nodes, or miners, which together
maintain a public ledger of transactions. The ledger takes the
form of a chain of blocks, the blockchain , where each block is
a batch of new transactions collected from users. One primary
problem with Satoshi’s blockchain is its highly limited scalability.
The security of Satoshi’s longest chain rule, more generally known
as the Bitcoin protocol, requires that all honest nodes be aware of
each other’s blocks very soon after the block’s creation. To this end,
the throughput of the system is artificially suppressed so that each
block fully propagates before the next one is created, and that very
few “orphan blocks” that fork the chain be created spontaneously.
In this paper we present PHANTOM, a proof-of-work based
protocol for a permissionless ledger that generalizes Nakamoto’s
blockchain to a direct acyclic graph of blocks (blockDAG).
PHANTOM includes a parameter k that controls the level of
tolerance of the protocol to blocks that were created concurrently,
which can be set to accommodate higher throughput. It thus avoids
the security-scalability tradeoff which Satoshi’s protocol suffers
from.
PHANTOM solves an optimization problem over the blockDAG
to distinguish between blocks mined properly by honest nodes
and those created by non-cooperating nodes who chose to deviate
from the mining protocol. Using this distinction, PHANTOM
provides a robust total order on the blockDAG in a way that
is eventually agreed upon by all honest nodes. Implementing
PHANTOM requires solving an NP-hard problem, and to avoid this
prohibitive computation, we devised an efficient greedy algorithm
GHOSTDAG that captures the essence of PHANTOM.
The GHOSTDAG protocol has been implemented as the
underlying technology of the Kaspa cryptocurrency. The Kaspa
network allows us to produce statistics about the performance of
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full
citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others
than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
AFT ’21, September 26–28, 2021, Arlington, VA, USA © 2021 Copyright held by the
owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to the Association for Computing
Machinery. ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9082-8/21/09. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3479722.3480990
GHOSTDAG in real world scenarios. We provide an analysis of
confirmation times obtained by observing the Kaspa network.
We provide a formal proof of the security of GHOSTDAG, namely,
that its ordering of blocks is irreversible up to an exponentially
negligible factor. We discuss the properties of GHOSTDAG and
how it compares to other DAG based protocols.
1 INTRODUCTION
The security of the Bitcoin protocol relies on blocks propagating
quickly to all miners in the network [ 9, 14, 19]. Block creation
itself is slowed down via the requirement that each block contain
a proof-of-work. For the Bitcoin protocol to be secure, block
propagation must be faster than the typical time it takes the network
together to create the next block. In order to guarantee this property,
the creation of blocks in Bitcoin is regulated by the protocol to occur
only once every 10 minutes, and the block size itself is limited to
allow for fast transmission. As a result, Bitcoin suffers from a highly
restrictive throughput on the order of 3-7 transactions per second
(tps)1.
The PHANTOM protocol. In this paper we present PHANTOM,
a protocol that generalizes Nakamoto’s longest chain protocol. In
Bitcoin, blocks reference a single predecessor in the chain, hence
form a tree; in contrast, PHANTOM blocks reference multiple
predecessors, thus forming a Directed Acyclic Graph, a blockDAG.
Each block can thus include several hash references to predecessors.
PHANTOM then provides a total ordering over all blocks and
transactions, and outputs a consistent set of accepted transactions.
Unlike the Bitcoin protocol, where blocks that are not on the main
chain are discarded, PHANTOM incorporates all blocks in the
blockDAG into the ledger, but places blocks that were created by
attackers later in the order.
In rough terms, PHANTOM consists of a three-step procedure:
(1) Using the structure of the blockDAG, we recognize a set
of well-connected blocks (we later refer to these as blue
blocks); this procedure is used to exclude blocks created by
misbehaving nodes and is the heart of the protocol: Blocks
that either reference only old blocks from the DAG, or are
withheld by their creator for some time, will be excluded
from the set of blue blocks with high probability.
(2) We complete the DAG’s naturally induced partial order
to a full topological one (i.e., an order which respects the
1The exact figure varies according to the size of a typical transaction, and changes if
one includes protocol changes such as SegWit, Schnorr signatures, etc.
=== PAGE 2 ===
, , Yonatan Sompolinsky, Shai Wyborski, and Aviv Zohar
topology) in a way that favours blocks inside the selected
cluster and penalizes those outside it.
(3) The order over blocks induces an order over transactions;
transactions in the same block are ordered according to
the order of their appearance in the block. We iterate over
all transactions in this order, and accept each one that is
consistent (according to the underlying consistency notion)
with all transactions approved so far.
Propagation delay. The first step above involves assuming
an upper bound on the network’s delay diameter D, and
parameterizing the protocol accordingly; k denotes this parameter.
Such an assumption is made in Nakamoto Consensus as well. In fact,
if PHANTOM is set to process low throughput, we can set k = 0,
in which case PHANTOM coincides with Nakamoto Consensus.
However, while Nakamoto Consensus suppresses the throughput
and sets the block creation rateλ such that D·λ≪ 1, PHANTOM
does not impose an a priori constraint over λ. Instead, the
throughput (in terms ofλ and the block size) can be set to approach
the network’s capacity, and thenk can be set after the fact to ensure
the safety of the protocol. This alleviates the security-scalability
tradeoff that Nakamoto Consensus suffers. Still, increasing k does
not come without cost, as we will discuss shortly.
GHOSTDAG. In its vanilla form, PHANTOM requires solving
an NP-hard problem, and is therefore unsuitable for practical
applications. Instead, we use the intuition behind PHANTOM to
devise a greedy algorithm, GHOSTDAG, which can be implemented
efficiently. We prove formally that GHOSTDAG is secure, in the
sense that its ordering of blocks becomes exponentially difficult to
reverse as time develops.
The main achievement of GHOSTDAG can be summarized as
follows:
Theorem (Informal). Given two transactions tx 1, tx 2 that were
published and embedded in the blockDAG at some point in time,
the probability that GHOSTDAG’s order between tx 1 and tx 2 changes
over time decreases exponentially as time grows, even under a high
block creation rate that is non-negligible relative to the network’s
propagation delay, assuming that a majority of the computational
power is held by honest nodes.
We will reformalize this theorem in Section 3, and provide a
formal proof in Appendix A.
We now proceed to describe the PHANTOM and GHOSTDAG
protocols more formally.
2 THE PHANTOM PROTOCOL
2.1 Preliminaries
The following terminology is used extensively throughout this
paper. A DAG of blocks is denoted G =(C, E), whereC represents
blocks and E represents the hash references to previous blocks. We
frequently write B∈ G instead of B∈C . past(B, G)⊂C denotes
the subset of blocks reachable from B (excluding B), and similarly
f uture(B, G)⊂C denotes the subset of blocks from which B is
reachable (excluding B); these are blocks that were provably created
before and after B, correspondingly. An edge in the DAG points
back in time, from the new block to previously created blocks which
it extends. We denote by anticone(B, G) the set of blocks outside
Figure 1: An example of a block DAG G. Each block
references all blocks that were known to its miner at the
time it was created. The DAG terminology applies to H
as follows:
past(H) = {Genesis , C, D, E} – blocks which H
references directly or indirectly, and which were
provably created before H ;
f utur e(H) = {J , K , M} – blocks which reference H
directly or indirectly, and which were provably created
after H ;
ant icone(H) = {B, F , I , L} – the order between these
blocks and H is ambiguous. Reaching consensus on the
order between blocks and other blocks in their anticone
is the main challenge that we face.
t ips(G) = {J , L, M} – leaf-blocks, namely, blocks with
in-degree 0; these will be referenced in the header of the
next block.
past(B, G) and f uture(B, G) (excluding B itself); this is the set of
blocks in the DAG which did not reference B (directly or indirectly
via their predecessors) and were not referenced by B (directly or
indirectly via B’s predecessors).2 Finally, tips(G) is the set of blocks
with in-degree 0 (usually, the most recent blocks). This terminology
is demonstrated in Figure 1.
2.2 The DAG mining protocol
Rather than extending a single chain, a miner in PHANTOM
references in its new block all blocks in tips(G), where G is the
DAG that the miner observes locally at the time when the new
block is created. Additionally, the miner should broadcast its new
block as fast as possible. These two rules together constitute the
DAG mining protocol in PHANTOM.
2.3 The DAG ordering protocol
The aforementioned DAG mining protocol implies in particular that
even when two blocks contain conflicting transactions, both blocks
are incorporated into the blockDAG and referenced by all (honest)
miners. The core challenge is then how to recover the consistency of
the blockDAG. This is done in our framework by ordering all blocks
– and by extension, all transactions – and accepting transactions one
by one, eliminating individual transactions that are inconsistent
2We will frequently abbreviate the notation and write, e.g., ant icone(B), instead of
ant icone(B, G).
=== PAGE 3 ===
PHANTOM GHOSTDAG
A Scalable Generalization of Nakamoto ConsensusNovember 10, 2021 , ,
with those approved before them. PHANTOM achieves consensus
on the order of blocks, and this guarantees agreement on the set of
accepted transactions as well.
Essentially, Bitcoin can be seen as an ordering protocol as well,
according to which transactions embedded in the longest chain of
blocks precede those off the longest chain. Unfortunately, Bitcoin’s
protocol is known to be secure only under slow block rates (see
Section 4).
The ordering rule of PHANTOM has two stages: First, we divide
the blocks to Blues and Reds; the Blue set represents blocks that
appear to have been mined by cooperating nodes, whereas blocks in
the Red set are outliers that were most likely mined by malicious or
strategic nodes. Then, we order the DAG in a way that favours blue
blocks and penalizes red ones. The latter step is rather immediate,
and the novelty of PHANTOM lies mainly in the first colouring
procedure.
2.3.1 The intuition behind PHANTOM. Just like Bitcoin,
PHANTOM relies on the ability of honest nodes to communicate
to their peers recent blocks in a timely manner, and on the
assumption that honest nodes possess more than 50% of the
hashrate. The block rate in Bitcoin is suppressed so as to ensure
block creation is slower than the time it takes to communicate
them. In PHANTOM, on the other hand, we notice that the set of
honest blocks can be recognized even when the block rate is high
and many forks appear spontaneously: Due to the communication
and cooperation of honest miners, we should expect to see in the
DAG a “well-connected” cluster of blocks.
Indeed, let D be an upper bound on the network’s propagation
delay. If block B was mined by an honest miner at time t, then any
block published before time t− D necessarily arrived at its miner
before time t, and is therefore included in past(B). Similarly, the
honest miner will publish B immediately, and so B will be included
in the past set of any block mined after timet +D. As a result, the set
of honest blocks in B’s anticone is typically small, and consists only
of blocks created in the interval[t− D, t + D]. The proof-of-work
mechanism guarantees that the number of blocks created in an
interval of length 2· D is typically below some k > 0.
In short, the set of blocks created by honest nodes
is well-connected. The following definition captures
“well-connectedness”:
Definition 1. Given a DAG G =(C, E), a subset S⊆C is called a
k-cluster, if∀B∈ S :|anticone(B)∩ S|≤ k.
Attacker nodes may deviate arbitrarily from the mining rules,
have large anticones, and even artificially increase the anticone
of honest blocks. Nonetheless, since honest miners possess more
proof-of-work power, it is usually impossible for malicious miners
to create a well-connected set of blocks that is larger than that
created by honest nodes. PHANTOM utilizes this fact and selects the
largest well-connected set within the DAG, by solving the following
optimization problem:
Maximum k-cluster SubDAG (MCS k )
Input: DAG G =(C, E)
Output: A subset S∗ ⊂ C of maximum size, s.t.
|anticone(B)∩ S∗|≤ k for all B∈ S∗.
In this formulation, the parameter k is predetermined; see
Section 4 for more details. An example of a maximum k-cluster
appears in Figure 2.
2.3.2 The PHANTOM protocol. Following the above intuition, the
ordering protocol of PHANTOM comprises the following two steps:
(1) Given a block G, solve MCS k(G); let’s refer to its output as
the Blue set and to its complement set as the Red one.
(2) Determine the order between Blue blocks according to some
topological sort. Then, for any Blue block B, add to the order
just before B all of the Red blocks in past(B) that weren’t
added to the order yet; these Red blocks too should be added
in a topological manner.3
An example of the output of the PHANTOM procedure on
the small blockDAG from Figure 2 is:(A, D, C, G, B, F, I, E,J, H, K).
Unfortunately, the Maximumk-cluster SubDAG problem is NP hard
(see problem [GT26] in [10]), and PHANTOM is therefore of less
practical use for an ever-growing blockDAG. We thus introduce a
greedy algorithm that is more suitable for implementation. We call
this greedy variant GHOSTDAG.4
2.4 The GHOSTDAG protocol
Similar to PHANTOM, the GHOSTDAG protocol selects ak-cluster,
which induces a colouring of the blocks as Blues (blocks in the
selected cluster) and Reds (blocks outside the cluster). However,
instead of searching for the largest k-cluster, GHOSTDAG finds a
k-cluster using a greedy algorithm. The algorithm constructs the
Blue set of the DAG by first inheriting the Blue set of the best tip
Bmax, i.e., the tip with the largest Blue set in its past, and then adds
to the Blue set blocks outside Bmax’s past in a way that preserves
the k-cluster property.
Observe that this greedy inheritance rule induces a chain: The
last block of the chain is the selected tip of G, Bmax; the next block
in the chain is the selected tip of the DAG past(Bmax); and so on
down to theдenesis . We denote this chain byChn(G) =(дenesis =
Chn0(G),Chn1(G), . . . ,Chnh(G)).
The final order over all blocks, in GHOSTDAG, follows a
similar path as the colouring procedure: We order the blockDAG
by first inheriting the order of Bmax on blocks in past(Bmax),
then adding Bmax itself to the order, and finally adding blocks
outside past(Bmax) according to some topological ordering. Thus,
essentially, the order over blocks becomes robust as the colouring
procedure.
2.4.1 Formal algorithm. The procedures described above are
formalized in Algorithm 1 below. The algorithm begins with
the base case where the DAG consists of the дenesis block only
(lines 2-3). Next, it performs a recursive call to compute the Blue
sets and ordering of the past of each of the DAG’s tips (lines 4-5),
and inherits those of the best tip (lines 6-8). Then, the selected
3The topological sorts in this second step are additionally required to be agnostic to
future blocks: For any Blue block B, the order on blocks in past(B) should remain
the same if we remove from the DAG blocks inf utur e(B). This can be implemented,
for instance, using a priority queue that pops out blocks according to the size of their
past set.
4In previous versions of this paper we referred to both versions as PHANTOM.
Essentially, GHOSTDAG can be seen as a fix of the greedy algorithm introduced
by the authors in [ 19], called the GHOST protocol. We thank Ethan Heilman for
suggesting this name.
=== PAGE 4 ===
, , Yonatan Sompolinsky, Shai Wyborski, and Aviv Zohar
Figure 2: An example of the largest 3-cluster of blocks
within a given DAG: A, B, C, D, F , G, I ,J (coloured blue).
It is easy to verify that each of these blue blocks has
at most 3 blue blocks in its anticone, and (a bit less
easy) that this is the largest set with this property.
Setting PHANTOM’s inter-connectivity parameter with
k = 3 means that at most 4 blocks are assumed to
be created within each unit of delay, so that typical
anticone sizes should not exceed 3. Blocks outside the
largest 3-cluster, E, H , K (coloured red), belong to the
attacker (w.h.p.). For instance, block E has 6 blue blocks
in its anticone ( B, C, D, F , G, I ); these blocks didn’t
reference E, presumably because E was withheld from
their miners. Similarly, block K admits 6 blue blocks in
its anticone ( B, C, G, F , I ,J ); presumably, its malicious
miner received already some of these blocks but violated
the mining protocol by not referencing them.
tip is added to the Blue set BlueSet G and to the last position in
the current ordered list OrderedList G (lines 9-10). Then we iterate
over anticone(Bmax, G) in some topological way which guarantees
that a block is visited only after its predecessors are (lines 11-14).5
For every block we visit, we check if adding B to the Blue set will
preserve the k-cluster property, and if this condition is satisfied,
we add B to the Blue set (lines 9-13); either way, we add B to the
current last position in the list (line 14). Finally, we return the Blue
set and the ordered Note that the recursion in the algorithm (line 5)
halts, because for any block B∈ G:|past(B)| <|G|.
We demonstrate the operation of this algorithm in Figure 3.We
have an efficient implementation of Algorithm 1, and we tested it
under high block rates (λ = 10, 25 blocks per second, for blocks of
size 0.1-1 MB). We will make the implementation available in the
full version of this paper.
2.5 Collapse to Bitcoin when k = 0
If the block creation rate is kept low, as in Bitcoin, the parameter k
can be safely set to 0, as honest blocks are likely to create a chain
5This can be implemented in several ways, e.g., by inserting all blocks in
ant icone(Bmax) into a deterministic priority queue which respects the topology.
That is, the queue should pop out a block only after all of its parents have been popped
out, and the order in which it pops blocks should be fully determined by the blockDAG.
Algorithm 1 Ordering the DAG
Input: G – a block DAG, k – the propagation parameter
Output: BLU Ek(G) – the Blue set of G; ord – an ordered list
containing all blocks in G
1: function OrderDAG(G, k)
2: if G =={дenesis} then
3: return[{дenesis} ,{дenesis}]
4: for B∈ tips(G) do
5: [BlueSet B, OrderedList B]←OrderDAG(past(B) , k)
6: Bmax ← arg max{|BlueSet B| : B∈ tips(G)}
(break ties according to lowest hash)
7: BlueSet G← BlueSet Bmax
8: OrderedList G← OrderedList Bmax
9: add Bmax to BlueSet G
10: add Bmax to the end of OrderedList G
11: for B∈ anticone(Bmax, G) do in some topological ordering
12: if BlueSet G∪{B} is a k-cluster then
13: add B to BlueSet G
14: add B to the end of OrderedList G
15: return[BlueSet G, OrderedList G]
(see Section 4). In such a setup, both PHANTOM and GHOSTDAG
converge to Bitcoin’s rule in the sense that, in case of a chain
split, blocks on the longest chain precede those off the longest
chain. These protocols would differ from Bitcoin’s rule in that, as
of according to the DAG mining protocol, blocks in the longest
chain would eventually reference those off the longest chain, in
PHANTOM or GHOSTDAG, and will thereby insert them in the
order.
In fact, it is easy to see that the longest chain is, by definition,
the largest 0-cluster of the DAG. Accordingly, our protocols can be
seen as a generalization of Satoshi’s longest-chain rule to a setup
where block rate is high and propagation delays are not negligible.
In Appendix A we prove that GHOSTDAG remains secure under
high block creation rates as well. We leave the formal analysis of
PHANTOM for future work.
3 FORMAL MODEL AND STATEMENT
In this section we describe our formal framework. While we
introduce new notation and terminology, the reader should keep
in mind that we stick to Nakamoto Consensus’s model in almost
every respect—transactions, blocks, Proof-of-work, computationally
bounded attacker, P2P propagation of blocks, probabilistic security
guarantees, etc. The “only” difference is that a block references
(possibly) several predecessors rather than a single one. While this
has far reaching consequences on how the ledger is to be interpreted,
on the mining side things remain largely the same.
3.1 Network
We follow the model specified in [18]. The network of nodes (or
miners) is denotedN, honest denotes the set of nodes that abide to
the mining protocol (as defined below), and malicious denotes the
rest of the nodes. Honest nodes form a connected component in
N’s topology, and the communication delay diameter of the honest
=== PAGE 5 ===
PHANTOM GHOSTDAG
A Scalable Generalization of Nakamoto ConsensusNovember 10, 2021 , ,
Figure 3: An example of a blockDAG G and the operation of GHOSTDAG to construct its blue set BLU E k(G) set, under the parameter k = 3.
The small circle near each block X represents its score, namely, the number of blue blocks in the DAGpast(X). The algorithm selects the chain
greedily, starting from the highest scoring tip M , then selecting its predecessor K (the highest scoring tip in past(M)), then H , D (breaking
the C, D, E tie arbitrarily), and finally Genesis . For methodological reasons, we add to this chain a hypothetical “virtual” block V – a block
whose past equals the entire current DAG. Blocks in the chain (дenesis , D, H , K , M , V) are marked with a light-blue shade. Using this chain,
we construct the DAG’s set of blue blocks, BLU E k(G). The set is constructed recursively, starting with an empty one, as follows: In step 1 we
visit D and addдenesis to the blue set, as the only block in past(D). Next, in step 2, we visit H and add to BLU E k(G) blocks that are blue in
past(H), namely, C, D, E. In step 3 we visit K and add H , I ; note that block B is in past(K) but was not added to the blue set, since it has 4
blue blocks in its anticone. In step 4 we visit M and add K to the blue set; again, note that F∈ past(M) could not be added to the blue set due
to its large blue anticone. Finally, in step 5, we visit the block vir tual(G) = V , and add M and to BLU E k(G), leaving L away due to its large
blue anticone, and leaving J away because adding it would cause I to suffer too large a blue anticone (it already has C, D, and H in it).
subnetwork is D: if an honest nodev∈N sends a message of size
b MB at time t, it arrives at all honest nodes by time t + D the
latest. The attacker is assumed to suffer no delays on its outgoing
or incoming links.
The real value ofD is a priori unknown. The PHANTOM protocol
assumes that D is always smaller than some constant Dmax (both
depend on the block sizeb). The parameter Dmax is not hard-coded
explicitly in the protocol, rather it influences another parameter,
k = k(Dmax), which is hard-coded and decided once and for all at
the inception of the system. Roughly speaking,k(Dmax) represents
an upper bound on the number of blocks that the network creates
in one unit of delay and that may not be referenced by one another.
Section 4 discusses this parameter in more detail.
3.2 Mining framework
Proof-of-work. Nodes create blocks of transactions by solving
Proof-of-work puzzles. Block creation follows a Poisson process
with parameterλ. For the sake of simplicity, we assume thatλ is
constant.6 We denote by time(B) the absolute time of B’s creation.
The computational power of nodev∈N is captured by 0 <αv < 1,
which represents the probability that node v will be the creator
of the next block in the system (at any point in time; this is a
memoryless process).
6In practice, λ must occasionally be readjusted to account for shifting network
conditions. PHANTOM can support a retargeting mechanism similar to Bitcoin’s,
e.g., readjust every time thatChn(G) grows by 2016 blocks.
Block references. Every block specifies its direct predecessors
by referencing their ID in its header (a block’s ID is obtained by
applying a collision resistant hash to its header); the choice of
predecessors will be described in the next subsection. This results
in a structure of a directed acyclic graph of blocks (as blocks can only
reference blocks created before them), denoted typicallyG =(C, E).
Recall that the topology of the DAG induces a natural partial
ordering over blocks (Subsection 2.1): if B∈ past(C) (equiv. C∈
f uture(B)) then C was provably created after B and therefore B
should precede C in the order.7
DAG mining protocol. Gv
t denotes the block DAG that nodev∈
N observes at time t. This DAG represents the history of all (valid)
block-messages received by the node. A node does not consider a
block as valid until it receives its entire past set. The unique block
дenesis is the block created at the inception of the system, and every
valid block must have it in its past set.
A tip of the DAG is a leaf-block, namely, a block with in-degree
0. The instructions to a miner in the DAG paradigm are simple:
(1) When creating or receiving a block, transmit it to all of one’s
peers inN . Formally, this implies that∀v, u∈ honest : Gv
t ⊆
Gu
t +D .
(2) When creating a block, embed in its header a list containing
the hash of all tips in the locally-observed DAG. Formally, this
7Note that an edge in the DAG points back in time, from the new block to previously
created blocks which it references.
=== PAGE 6 ===
, , Yonatan Sompolinsky, Shai Wyborski, and Aviv Zohar
implies that if block B was created at time t, by honest node v,
then past(B) = Gv
t .8
Since these are the only two mining rules in our system, a
byzantine behaviour of the attacker (which controls up to α of
the mining power) amounts to an arbitrary deviation from one or
both of these instructions.
For convenience, we additionally regard the virtual block of the
DAG,virtual(G), which is a hypothetical (un-mined) block which
points to the DAG’s tips as its parents. Thus,past(virtual(G)) = G.
Essentially,virtual(G) represent the block template for the next
block to be created by the miner, if it is honest.
3.3 DAG client protocol
The DAG as described so far possibly embeds conflicting
transactions. In our work, these conflicts are resolved via an
ordering protocol, namely, a protocol through which all nodes
agree on the order of all transactions in the system. We refer to
the ordering rule as the client protocol, as every participant in the
network can run the ordering procedure on its client locally without
any need to communicate additional messages with other clients.
Once such an order is agreed, one can iterate over all transactions
in the prescribed order and approve each transaction that is
consistent with those approved so far. In the case where transactions
represent payments in Bitcoin’s UTXO model, a transaction would
be consistent with the set of previously approved transactions if its
inputs belong to this set and none of these inputs are already spent
by another transaction in the set (i.e., no “double spend”). However,
our work is agnostic to the precise definitions of the transaction
space and of the underlying consistency notion—for our purpose,
suffice it to regard an abstract transaction spaceU and an abstract
consistency function that determines whether a set of transactions
T⊆U is consistent or not.
Formally, an ordering rule ord takes as input a blockDAG G and
outputs a linear order over G’s blocks, ord(G) =(B0, B1, . . . , B|G|).
Transactions in the same block are ordered according to their
appearance in it, and this convention allows us to talk henceforth
on the order of blocks only. With respect to a given rule ord , we
write B≺or d(G) C if the index of B precedes that of C in ord(G);
we abbreviate and write B≺G C or even B≺ C when the context
is understood. For convenience, we use the same notation B≺G C
when B∈ G but C < G.
3.4 Convergence of the order
The following definition captures the desired security of the
protocol, in terms of the probability that some order between two
blocks will be reversed.
Definition 2. Fix a rule ord , time t > 0, and node u∈N .
• For B∈ Gu
t , Risku(B, t, r) is defined by the probability that,
from the point of view of u, a block that did not precede B in
time t + r will later come to precede it:
Risku(B, t, r) := Pr

∃s > t + r,∃C∈ Gu
s : B≺Gu
t +r C∧ C≺Gus B

• If B < Gu
t we define Risku(B, t, r) = 1.
8Technically it is more accurate to write past(B) = Gv
t \{B}, as a block does not
belongs to its own past set.
• The function Risk is the maximal Risku over honest nodes:
Risk(B, t, r) := max
u∈honest
Risku(B, t, r)
Intuitively,t represents the time at which blockB was included in
the DAG, andt + r the time at which transactions in B can be safely
accepted as no conflicting ones would be able to bypass them. In the
definition above, the probability is taken over all random events in
the network, including block creation and propagation, as well as
the attacker’s arbitrary behaviour. The convergence property below
guarantees that the order between a block and those succeeding
it (or those not published yet) will not be reversed, w.h.p. This
captures the security of the protocol, as it provides honest nodes
with (probabilistic) security guarantees regarding possible reorgs.
Property 1. An ordering rule ord is said to (1-α)-converge if∀t > 0,
∀u ∈ honest and∀B ∈ Gu
t : limr→∞ Risk(B, t, r) = 0, even when a
fractionα of the mining power is byzantine.
Ideally, we would want Risk(B, t,·) to vanish exponentially fast
so as to ensure speedy confirmation times.
Remark. Property 1 essentially couples the Safety and Liveness
properties required from consensus protocols. Indeed, once
Risk(B, t, r) <ϵ, a decision to accept transactions in B can be made
(Liveness), and is guaranteed to be irreversible (Safety) up to an error
probability of ϵ—as in Nakamoto Consensus and similar protocols,
decisions are only irreversible in the probabilistic sense. Nevertheless,
we avoid phrasing our results in these terms, for the sake of clarity of
presentation. The complication arises from the need to analyze the
system from the perspective of every node Gv
t ; this technicality is
not unique to PHANTOM, and should be regarded in any work that
formalizes blockchain based consensus (unless propagation delays
are assumed to be negligible). We leave the task of bridging this gap
to a later version.
The security threshold is the minimal portion of the hashing
power that an attacker must acquire in order to disrupt the
protocol’s operation:
Definition 3. The security threshold of an ordering rule ord is
defined as the maximal α (attacker’s relative computational power)
for which ord (1-α)-converges exponentially fast.
3.5 Main result
A protocol is scalable if it is safe to increase the block creation
rateλ without compromising the security, that is, if the security
threshold does not deteriorate asλ increases (this can be phrased
also in terms of increasing the block size b rather thanλ).
We claim that GHOSTDAG is indeed a scalable protocol, in this
sense:
Theorem 4 (GHOSTDAG scales). Given a block creation rateλ > 0,
δ > 0, and Dmax > 0, if Dmax is equal to or greater than the
network’s propagation delay diameter D, then the security threshold
of GHOSTDAG, parameterized with k(Dmax ,λ,δ), is lower bounded
by 1
2·( 1−δ).
The parameterization of GHOSTDAG via k(Dmax ,λ,δ) is
defined in the subsequent section. Theorem 4 encapsulates the
main achievement of our work. We prove the theorem formally in
=== PAGE 7 ===
PHANTOM GHOSTDAG
A Scalable Generalization of Nakamoto ConsensusNovember 10, 2021 , ,
Section A. Contrast this result to a theorem regarding Nakamoto
Consensus, which appears in several forms in previous work
(e.g., [15, 19]):
Theorem 5 (Nakamoto Consensus does not scale) . The security
threshold of Nakamoto Consensus goes to 0 as D·λ grows.
Finally, we note that even if Dmax ̸≥ D, the system’s security
does not immediately break apart. Rather, the minimal power
needed to attack the system goes from 50% (times ( 1−δ)) to 0,
deteriorating at a rate that depends on the error gap D− Dmax .
4 SCALABILITY AND NETWORK DELAYS
4.1 The propagation delay parameter Dmax
The scalability of a distributed algorithm is closely tied to the
assumptions it makes on the underlying network, and specifically
on its propagation delay D = D(b) where b is the block-size in
KB. The real value of D is both unknown and sensitive to shifting
network conditions. For this reason, Bitcoin operates under the
assumption that D is much smaller than 10 minutes, and sets the
average block interval time to 10 minutes. While this seems like an
overestimation of the network’s propagation delay under normal
conditions (at least in 2018’s Internet terms), some safety margin
must be taken, to account for peculiar network conditions as well.
Similarly, in PHANTOM (and GHOSTDAG) we assume that the
unknown D is upper bounded by some Dmax = Dmax(b) which
is known to the protocol. The protocol does not explicitly encode
Dmax , rather, it is used to parameterize k, as will be described in
the next subsection.
The use of an a priori known bound Dmax distinguishes
GHOSTDAG’s (and PHANTOM’s) security model from that of
SPECTRE [18]. While the security of both protocols depends on
the assumption that the network’s propagation delay D is upper
bounded by some constant, in SPECTRE the value of such a
constant need not be known or assumed by the protocol, whereas
GHOSTDAG makes explicit use of this parameter (via k) when
ordering the DAG’s blocks. The fact that the order between any
two blocks becomes robust in GHOSTDAG, but not in SPECTRE,
should be ascribed to this added assumption; see further discussion
in Section 5.
4.2 The anticone size parameter k
The parameter k is decided from the outset and hard-coded in the
protocol. It is defined as follows:
k(Dmax ,λ,δ) := min
n
ˆk∈ N : f( ˆk, Dmax ,λ) <δ
o
(1)
f( ˆk, Dmax ,λ) := max
 

∞Õ
j= ˆk +1
e−2·c·(2· c)j
j! , 2· c
ˆk + 2· c
 

, (2)
where c := Dmax · λ. The motivation behind this definition is
twofold.
Natural anticone size. First, we want to devise a bound over the
number of blocks created in parallel. Since the block creation rate
follows a Poisson process, for an arbitrary block B created at time
t, k(Dmax ,λ,δ) bounds the number of additional blocks created in
the time interval[t− Dmax , t + Dmax], with probability of at least
1−δ; the term ˝∞
j= ˆk+1 e−2·Dmax·λ·(2·Dmax·λ)j
j! from (2) bounds
the probability that more than k blocks were created in parallel to
B in the time interval[t− Dmax , t + Dmax].
Observe that blocks created in the intervals[0, t− Dmax) and
(t + Dmax ,∞), by honest nodes, belong to B’s past and future sets,
respectively. Consequently, in principle,|anticone(B)| ≤ k with
probability of 1−δ at least. However, an attacker can artificially
increase B’s anticone by creating blocks that do not reference it
and by withholding his blocks so that B cannot reference them.
Chain growth rate. The second motivation for (1) is potential
manipulations by attackers on the increase rate of the blue set.
GHOSTDAG does not guarantee that discovering new blocks
necessarily increases the size of the blue set. Fortunately, by
increasing k, we are able guarantee that the adverse effect is
arbitrarily small. Indeed, a worst case analysis carried out in
Lemma 9 shows that the overall decrease is at most by a factor of
1− 2·C
k +2·C

. This is the role of the right-hand size term inside (2).
We note one caveat here: the probability 2·C
k +2·C does not vanish
exponentially fast with k. To fix this, a tighter analysis of the effect
of these attacks is needed; we leave this challenge to future work.
4.3 Trade-offs
Theorem 4, and the parameterization of GHOSTDAG in (1), tie
together k, Dmax , λ, and δ. Striving for a better performance
by modifying one parameter (e.g., increasing λ to obtain larger
throughput and more frequent blocks) must be understood and
considered against the effect on all other parameters.
Increased block creation rate. Although the security threshold
does not deteriorate as λ is increased, λ cannot be increased
indefinitely, or otherwise the network becomes congested. The
value of λ should be set such that nodes that are expected to
participate in the system can support such a throughput. For
instance, if nodes are required to maintain a bandwidth of at least
1 MB per second, and blocks are of size b = 1 MB, then the block
creation rate should be set toλ = 1 blocks per second (this is merely
a back-of-the-envelope calculation, and in practice other messages
consume the bandwidth as well).
Higher security threshold. Theorem 4 states the security
threshold in terms ofδ. Following (1) we notice that tightening the
security threshold – by choosing a lowerδ – requires increasing
k. A large k leads to slow confirmation times, as will be discussed
shortly.9
Larger safety margin. Similarly, if Dmax is to be increased, one
needs to increase k as well in order to maintain the same security
level (represented byδ).
As discussed in Subsection 4.1, it is better to overestimate D and
choose a large Dmax in order to remain on the safe side.10 Recall
that the security of Bitcoin’s chain depends on the assumption that
D·λ≪ 1, namely, that w.h.p. at least D seconds pass between
consecutive blocks, so that forks are rare. Thus, Bitcoin’s large
9The advanced reader should notice that although increasingλ has a similar negative
effect on k, it has at the same time a positive effect on confirmation times, and so a
certainλ will be optimal as far as confirmation times are concerned.
10Several blockchain based projects do not do so, and consequently compromise the
security threshold of their system.
=== PAGE 8 ===
, , Yonatan Sompolinsky, Shai Wyborski, and Aviv Zohar
safety margin over D suppresses its throughput severely as it
requires selecting a very low block rate λ = 1/600 (one block
per 10 minutes). This is not the case with GHOSTDAG’s DAG, as
the security of the DAG ordering does not rely on the assumption
D·λ≪ 1. Therefore, even if we overestimate D, we can still allow
for very high block creation rates while maintaining the same
level of security. Consequently, GHOSTDAG supports a very large
throughput, and does not suffer from a security-scalability tradeoff.
That said, in GHOSTDAG there is still a tradeoff between a
large safety margin and fast convergence of the protocol. A gross
overestimation of Dmax – resulting an increase in k – would
significantly increase the waiting time for transaction settlement.
Thus, Dmax should be set to a reasonable level. In Section 5 we
discuss how this tradeoff can be restricted to visible conflicts only,
and how applications such as payments can enjoy much faster
confirmation times.
A note on the effective throughput. To increase the number of
transactions included in the DAG per second, the protocol designer
can increase the block rateλ or/and the block size b (which in turn
affects Dmax = Dmax(b)). However, if honest miners include in
their blocks the very same transactions, this would not contribute to
the number of unique transactions included in the DAG, per second.
There are two approaches to fix this. The first is to observe that
honest and rational miners are actually incentivized to randomize
over the transactions available to them in order to avoid “collision”
and to thereby maximize their own profit; see more on this in [12].
The second approach is to shard the transaction space and allow
the block to contain transactions from one shard only, in a way
that guarantees that parallel blocks will not collide on the same
shard, with high probability. This technique was used in some of the
works mentioned in Section 7, under “Parallel Nakamoto Chains”.
Both techniques can be deployed in GHOSTDAG. Consequently,
increasing the block rate or block size does indeed lead to a linear
increase in the effective throughput.
5 CONFIRMATION TIMES
As in Nakamoto Consensus, the waiting time for transaction
confirmation depends on the assumed attacker size α, and on
the allowed error ϵ. The security analysis given in Appendix A
shows that within constant expected time the chain of the honest
network enters into a block race with any hypothetical or actual
attacker chain. It is implied that the waiting time for the ordering
between a given block B and other blocks becomes robust at a rate
ofO

log α
1−α
(1/ϵ)

. This analysis was asymptotic, and we leave the
task of tightening the analysis and improving the constants (hidden
in theO) for future work.
Still, we observe that in the case of payments, transactions of
honest users can be confirmed much faster. Indeed, an honest user
will not publish a conflicting transaction, and her transaction will
therefore be commutative with all other published transactions.
Of course, the payee does not know a priori who of the payers is
honest, and will thus wait until the block containing the transaction
is guaranteed (w.h.p.) to precede any new block that might be
published by the attacker. Blocks that are published in the interim
will not contain a conflicting transaction, in the case of an honest
payer, and will therefore not delay acceptance.
Formally, we argue that GHOSTDAG enjoys the following
property: Given a published block b, the probability that a newly
added block in anticone(b) will be accepted as a blue block decays
exponentially:
Proposition 6. If blocks b and c were published at times t and t + r ,
respectively, and c∈ anticone(b), then the probability that c will ever
be considered blue isO(e−C·r) for some positive constant C.
Proof. Lemma 9 implies that the number of adversary blocks
that are in the blue set of an honest node and not in past(B) grows
linearly with r. LetBr = f uture(B)∩ past(Br) where Br is the
honest tip of the node just before r. Then for any N and for any
sufficiently large r it holds that|Br|≤ N + k. All blocks inBr are
in anticone(C), for any C∈ anticone(B) that was discovered after
t + r: indeed, if B′∈B r satisfies B′ < C then B′ < B, and if C < B′
then it was discovered before t + r. Therefore, if Br remains the
honest tip at time t + r, then C is not in the blue set of the honest
node, as it has at least|Br| > k blue blocks in its anticone.
Let B′ be a block such that C∈ BlueSet(B′), then |BlueSet(B′)∩
Br|≤ k, or otherwise C cannot be inside BlueSet(B′). This proves
that for the honest node to consider C blue, a block B′ has to win
a block-race with Br – up to 3k blocks which it can freeload –
which started a time t the latest and lasted up to t + r at least. The
probability of winning such a block-race is inO(e−C·r). □
In fact, following a similar analysis to that developed in [17, 18],
the probability of C becoming blue is
∞Õ
m=0
m + N + k− 1
m

·αm·( 1−α′)N +k·
 α
1−α′
max(N−m,0)
where 1−α′ =(1−α)·( 1−δ) as derived in Lemma 9. This implies,
practically, that a merchant who received a payment in a block B,
listens to the blockDAG and sees no conflicting payment in any
block in B’s anticone, can accept the payment when the latter term
becomes smaller than ϵ (- the error probability allowed by the
merchant).
For example, if the block creation rate is set toλ = 1 block per
second, and the assumed upper bound on the network’s round trip
time (2· D) is 7 seconds, then k can safely be set to 16. Assuming an
attacker withα≤ 0.25, and an allowed error ofϵ = 0.1% (the values
of these parameters must be assumed in Nakamoto Consensus as
well), the waiting time for transaction confirmation would be in
the order of 45 seconds. Note that if the actual network delay is
smaller than the 7 seconds bound – say, below 4 seconds, as in
Bitcoin’s Relay Network [1] – then the waiting time will remain the
same. This demonstrates that GHOSTDAG is not responsive to the
actual network delay. For comparison, under the same conditions,
SPECTRE’s waiting time would be in the order of 21 seconds. This is
due to SPECTRE not assuming any upper bound within the protocol,
which enables it to be responsive.
6 IMPLEMENTATION: THE KASPA
NETWORK
Kaspa is a cryptocurrency which operates over an open
source implementation of the GHOSTDAG protocol [ 2]. This
implementation includes an entire range of tools useful to monitor,
=== PAGE 9 ===
PHANTOM GHOSTDAG
A Scalable Generalization of Nakamoto ConsensusNovember 10, 2021 , ,
Figure 4: A histogram of the elapsed waiting time
for a first confirmation of 458,557 transactions. The
horizontal axis is confirmation time in seconds, the
vertical axis is the number of transaction (note that the
vertical axis is log scaled).
test and analyze the network. Among these tools are a block
explorer [4], a graph inspector [3] and a performance dashboard
[5] which monitors quantities of interest such as the global hash
rate, transaction throughput and combinatorial properties of the
DAG such as width and tip count.
The Kaspa implementation also includes features not discussed
in the current work such as difficulty adjustment and algorithmic
solution for efficient computation of all required quantities such as
the blue anticone.
Unlike simple proof of concept simulations, the Kaspa network
provides evidence of the feasibility of GHOSTDAG in real world
situations where the global hashrate fluctuates, the network miners
are organically spread11, nodes are required to synchronize and
verify blocks reasonably fast, and the network has been running
for extended periods of time.
At its current state, the fully operational network easily handles
a throughput of 40 transactions per second, where the average
waiting time for a single confirmation is of the order of seconds. We
stress that a throughput of 40 transaction per second is larger than
the highest throughput ever witnessed on both the Ethereum and
Bitcoin networks, whose confirmation times are longer by orders
of magnitude.
We emphasize that the nodes running on the Kaspa network
are fully operational, and furnish all services required for a real
world cryptocurrency. The performance data of the network should
not be compared against considerably simplified proof of concept
simulations.
We tested the confirmation times of the network by generating
a total of 458,557 transactions and measuring how long before each
transaction got a first confirmation. The results are summarized in
fig. 4 and table 1.
11at the time of writing, at least 30% of the Kaspa mining is carried out by parties other
than the original developers
Table 1: Percentage of transaction approved within given
periods of time of the transactions described in fig. 4.
All transactions were eventually confirmed. The largest
observed first confirmation time is 746 second.
Wait time 1s 2s 3s 4s 5s 10s
Approval
rate 5.3% 27.8% 43.6% 53.1% 59.3% 70,4%
Wait time 30s 1m 2m 5m 10m
Approval
rate 80.7% 86.4% 92.2% 99.5% 99.9%
7 RELATED WORK
Many suggestions to improve the scalability of permissionless
blockchains have been proposed in recent years. These proposals
fall into two main categories, on-chain scaling and off-chain scaling.
On-chain scaling. The protocols in this category may differ, e.g.,
in how fast blocks are created, how blocks are organized in the
ledger (a chain, a tree, a DAG, etc.), which transactions in the
ledger are considered valid, and more. PHANTOM belongs to this
line of works. Previous works in this family of protocols includes
GHOST [19], where a main chain of blocks is chosen according
to a greedy algorithm and not through the longest chain rule;
Inclusive [12], where any chain-selection rule is extended to an
ordered DAG and transactions off the main chain are added in a
consistent manner; Bitcoin NG [ 7], where the ledger consists of
slow key blocks (containing no transactions) and fast microblocks
that contain transactions. The sole purpose of key blocks in Bitcoin
NG is to define the miner that is eligible to create microblocks in
that epoch and confirm thus transactions at a high rate.
GHOST is still susceptible to some attacks, one of which was
described in [11]. The DAG in Inclusive adds throughput but not
security to the main chain, hence suffers from the same limitations
as the underlying main chain selection rule. Key blocks in Bitcoin
NG are still generated slowly, thus confirmation times remain high.
Our work is most similar to the SPECTRE protocol [ 18].
SPECTRE enjoys both high throughput and fast confirmation
times. It uses the structure of the DAG as representing an abstract
vote regarding the order between each pair of blocks. One caveat
of SPECTRE is that the output of this pairwise ordering may
not be extendable to a total order, due to possible Condorcet
cycles. Another related caveat is that SPECTRE does not guarantee
convergence of the ordering between two blocks that were
published in time proximity to one another. This weak liveness
property is showed to suffice for the use case of payments, where
conflicts in two such blocks can only harm a malicious user
that published a double spend. PHANTOM solves these issues
and provides a linear ordering over the blocks of the DAG. As
such, PHANTOM can support consensus regarding any general
computation, including general Smart Contracts, which SPECTRE
cannot handle. Indeed, in order for a computation or contract to
be processed correctly and consistently, the full order of events
in the ledger is usually required, and particularly the order of
=== PAGE 10 ===
, , Yonatan Sompolinsky, Shai Wyborski, and Aviv Zohar
inputs to the contract. 12 PHANTOM’s linear ordering does not
come without cost—confirmation times are mush slower than those
in SPECTRE. In Section 5 we discuss the confirmation times in
PHANTOM compared to those of SPECTRE, when the user does
not publish a visible double spend.
Parallel Nakamoto Chains. Another line of work attempts to
avoid the scalability-security tradeoff imposed by the longest chain
rule by dividing the ledger into k separate Nakamoto chains [6, 8,
20]. The basic technique behind these protocols is to assign a block
to one of the chains only after it was successfully mined, using the
proof-of-work randomness represented in (the hash of) its header.
This randomness ensures that an attacker cannot choose which
chain to concentrate its attack on. One way to view these protocols
and compare them against PHANTOM (and GHOSTDAG) is that
Nakamoto Consensus operates under the assumption thatD·λ≪ 1,
PHANTOM under the assumption that D·λ≪ k, and these parallel
chain protocols under D·λ/k≪ 1; indeed, by dividing the protocol
into k separate chains, each chain is mined at a rate ofλ/k, and this
inequality ensures that each chain enjoys a negligible orphan rate
similarly to Nakamoto Consensus.
Protocols in this paradigm must specify the order over blocks in
the ledger of parallel chains. The performance of these protocols
depends on their respective ordering rules, and we differ the task
of rigorously comparing them to GHOSTDAG to the full version of
this paper.
An attack on a previous variant. The work in [ 13]
presents a DAG-based protocol Conflux, which is identical
to Inclusive-GHOST [ 12, 19]. In the appendix section of [ 13]
there appears an attack on a previous version of PHANTOM. In
that version, the greedy algorithm inherited the blue set S of the
maximal tip, and added blocks to S as long as their anticone in
S was of size k or less. The fact that the greedy algorithm – in
contrast to vanilla PHANTOM– did not attempt at enforcing the
k-cluster property on the chosen set of blue blocks was shown
in [13] to be exploitable. The greedy algorithm presented in this
updated version of the paper, GHOSTDAG, does enforce the
k-cluster property; we utilize this fact to prove its correctness. We
thank the authors of [13] for highlighting this subtlety.
Off-chain scaling. Our work is orthogonal and complementary
to off-chain scaling solutions, and can enhance their operation
by orders-of-magnitude. For instance, when the DAG is used
to serve channel-settlement transactions of Bitcoin’s Lightning
Network [16], it allows for a much cheaper access (due to larger
supply of blocks and capacity) and much faster processing than if
the LN were operating over a chain.
8 DISCUSSION
In this work we have introduced the PHANTOM paradigm, which
generalizes over Nakamoto’s chain into a DAG, and which imposes
no a priori constraint over the system’s throughput, thus avoiding
the scalability-security tradeoff imposed by Nakamoto Consensus.
We described a greedy algorithm, GHOSTDAG, which is more
practical to implement, and proved its security rigorously. There
are still several open research questions regarding GHOSTDAG: a
12Contracts that do not require such a strict ordering can indeed be served under
SPECTRE as well.
tight analysis of its confirmation times, a comparison between it
and other greedy algorithms that approximate PHANTOM, and a
security analysis of the original PHANTOM protocol which wasn’t
provided in this work.
A GHOSTDAG SCALABILITY PROOF
We present a proof that the GHOSTDAG order converges, and that
an attacker (with less than 50% of the global hashrate) is unable to
cause reorgs. We restate the theorem from Section 3:
Theorem 4 (GHOSTDAG scales) Given a block creation rate λ > 0,
δ > 0, and Dmax > 0, if Dmax is equal to or greater than the
network’s propagation delay diameter D, then the security threshold of
GHOSTDAG, parameterized withk(Dmax ,λ,δ), is at least 1
2·(1−δ).
Assumptions and notations. We first remind the reader that the
topology of the DAG is regarded in our context in reverse to the
usual convention, namely, if there is a path from a blockB to a block
C we say thatC is a parent of B, whereas most literature concerning
DAGs would say that B is a parent (or predecessor) of C. In our
context blocks always point to older blocks, so this anti-convention
is biologically justified whereas the conventional terminology is
misleading.
We assume a worst case byzantine attacker which suffers no
internal delays or delays from or to honest nodes, and which
deviates from the mining protocol arbitrarily (see definition). Still,
regardless of any attacker intervention in the network, she cannot
cause messages between honest nodes to take longer than Dmax to
propagate. In the sequel, to avoid clutter, we useD instead of Dmax
to denote the bound on the network delay (note that in previous
sections D was used to denote the actual delay).
When discussing the honest network, we fix an arbitrary honest
node u∈ honest and assume its point of view, whereby terms such
as the honest chain should be interpreted from u’s point of view.
To that effect, by the honest (attacker) tips at time t we mean all
immediate parents of the virtual block of the honest (attacker) node
at time t, by the honest (attacker) chain we mean the selected chain
of the virtual block, and by the honest (attacker) blue set we mean
the blue set of the virtual block of the honest (attacker) node.
The attacker does not follow the consensus rules and in particular
may create a block which points at blocks which are not tips, and
withhold any blocks they create. Hence, we separate between the
time a block was created (by the attacker) and by the time it was
discovered (by the arbitrary honest node u).
The honest score wH(t) is defined as the score of the virtual block
of the honest node at time t. The advantage of a block B is defined
as adv(B) = score(B)− wH(t), where t is the time B was created.
The attacker advantage adv(t) is the maximum of adv(B) over all
attacker tips at time t. For a given block B, we define the relative
advantage advB(t) to be the maximum of adv(B) over all attacker
tips at time t such that B is not in their selected chain (or−∞ if
there are none). We say that B convinced the honest node at time t
if it was discovered before t− 2D and was in the selected chain at
time t.
We use B→ C to denote that C is an immediate parent of B
and B ⇒ C to indicate that it is a selected parent. We use C < B
to denote that C∈ past(B) and C <⋆ B to denote at C is in the
=== PAGE 11 ===
PHANTOM GHOSTDAG
A Scalable Generalization of Nakamoto ConsensusNovember 10, 2021 , ,
selected chain of B. We use C≤ B and C≤⋆ B to denote the same,
with the possibility that B = C.
We define many constants throughout the proof with the proviso
that they only depend "on system parameters", by which we mean
that they only depend onλ, D and k (and not on t, on the particular
DAG structure of any node, etc.).
Proof Structure. Due to the definition of security threshold in
Definition 3, Theorem 4 reduces to the following proposition.
Proposition 7 (GHOSTDAG security). For any t, r , the probability
that the ordering of two blocks published before time t will change
after time t + r isO(e−cr), where c depends only on the system
parameters.
In terms of Section 3, Proposition 7 states that Risku(B, t, r)
decays exponentially fast, at a rate which does not depend on u
or t. This implies that Risk(B, t, r) decays at the same rate, and in
particular that the GHOSTDAG ordering rule(1−α)-converges.
The correctness of this Proposition 7 follows from the following
proposition:
Proposition 8. Assume that B convinced the network at time t, then
advB(t) is bound from above by a Markovian process on Z which goes
to−∞ exponentially fast.13.
The following two lemmas, which are of independent interest,
are part of the proof of Proposition 8. The first lemma states that
the growth rate of the blue score of the public chain is 1−α, up to
a factor arbitrarily close to 1:
Lemma 9. The expected value of wH(t + r)− wH(t) is at least
(1−α)(1−δ) rλ.
The next lemma states that the attacker’s advantage can be
capped with high probability:
Lemma 10. The advantage adv(t) is upper bounded by a stochastic
process which admits a stationary distribution with an exponentially
decaying tail.
Blue set growth. In this section we discuss the non monotonicity
of the chain weight and prove Lemma 9.
In Nakamoto Consensus the longest chain is chosen, and it is
therefore impossible for an adversary to reduce the length of the
longest chain by publishing blocks. Stated otherwise, the score of
a Bitcoin node increases monotonically. In GHOSTDAG this no
longer holds. Indeed, there are cases where by learning of new
blocks, the blue score of the virtual node actually decreases. This
might have an adverse effect on the growth of the blue set, that is, of
the score of the honest network. This adverse effect is bounded by a
constant factor of

1− 2Dλ
k +2Dλ

which is already built intoδ in the
definition of the security threshold (1). That this is the appropriate
factor is exactly the statement of Lemma 9, which we now prove.
Lemma 9. The expected value of wH(t + r)− wH(t) is at least
(1−α)(1−δ) rλ.
13In the same sense that a random walk on Z which is biased to the left goes to−∞
exponentially fast. That is, if T is the transition operator and p is a finitely supported
distribution on Z, then for any N ∈ Z it holds that∥Π[N ,∞)T O(N)p∥1 = O(c N) for
some constant c < 1 (which is α
1−α for a random walk which transitions right with
probabilityα < 1/2)
Proof. Assume that a block B was published that caused wH
to decrease. Let B′ be the honest selected tip right before B was
published. We must have that B′ ≮ B and that score(B) ≥
score(B′), then the reduction in score is at most the amount of
blocks in anticone(B′) that the virtual node considered blue before
B was discovered, and red after B was discovered. In particular,
any such block must have an anticone larger than k. If all blocks
are honest then the probability of this is at most δ; this follows
from Dmax ≥ D and from k(D,λ,δ) monotonically increasing in D.
This proves the theorem for the special case of an attacker which
indefinitely withholds their blocks.
To generalize to the adversarial setting, we need to argue the
most damage an attacker can cause to the blue score by withholding
blocks. Assume that at timet a block C was discovered that reduced
the blue score, and let B be the honest selected tip right before C
was published. If B <⋆ C then score(C) > score(B), contradicting
the hypothesis. It follows thatC→ B can only increasescore(C), so
we may assume without loss thatC̸→ B. It follows thatscore(C)≥
score(B), for else B would have remained the honest selected tip
and the score could not have decreased.
Let nB be the number of blue blocks in the anticone of B that
were in the honest blue when B was the selected tip, and let nC
be defined similarly for C, then the decrease in score is at most
nB− nC . However, note that if the selected chain ofC contains less
than k blocks above max(SelectedChain(B)∩ SelectedChain(C))
then nB≥ nC (as any block in anticone(B) could be a blue block,
up to k blocks), and the score actually did not decrease.
It follows that the adversary gains the most by publishing k + 1
blocks in the anticone of the selected parent such that the most
recent published block has score at least as large as that of the
selected parent. This will cause the honest network to switch a
chain, such that all the blocks in the anticone of the old selected
parent, except the k + 1 blocks published by the adversary, will be
considered red (as they are all in the anticone of the publishedk + 1
blocks, which are blue). On average, there are at most 2Dλ such
blocks, so that the adversary has managed to replace k + 2Dλ blue
blocks with k + 1 blue blocks.
This implies that the highest factor by which the adversary can
reduce the growth of the honest blue set is k
k +2Dλ = 1− 2Dλ
k+2Dλ .
Letδ0 be the probability that a particular honest block has an
honest anticone larger than k. It follows that the expected value
of wH(t)− wH(s) is at least(1−α)(1−δ0)

1− 2Dλ
k +2Dλ

(t− s)λ >
(1−α)(1−δ)(t− s)λ, where the last inequality holds by equation 2
in the definition of k. □
Freeloading and Bounded Advantage. In this section we prove
Lemma 10, by a reduction to the analysis carried in [18]. The main
challenge in this reduction is that the attacker may use the work
done by the honest network to boost the score of their competing
chain, by including honest blocks in the blue set of the chain tip.
We call this phenomenon freeloading, more formally:
Definition 11. We say that C ∈A is freeloading off B∈H if
B∈ BlueSet(C), and C′ <⋆ C implies B < BlueSet(C′).
It turns out that the advantage an attacker can gain by
freeloading is bound by a constant depending only on system
parameters.
=== PAGE 12 ===
, , Yonatan Sompolinsky, Shai Wyborski, and Aviv Zohar
Lemma 12 (The Freeloader Bound). If C is freeloading off B then
score(C)≤ score(B) + 4k.
Proof. First note that if C ⇒ B then score(C)≤ score(B) + k,
as GHOSTDAG does not add more than k blue blocks to C’s blue
set over that of its selected parentB. We subsequently treat the case
where C̸⇒ B. Let D <⋆ C be maximal such that D < B (this set
is not empty as it contains the genesis block).Then score(B) >
score(D). We show below that score(C)− score(D) ≤ 3k + 1
and conclude that score(C)≤ score(B) + 3k. Note the following
observations:
• score(C)− score(D)≤| BlueSet(C)\ past(D)|,
• BlueSet(C)\ past(D)⊂D 1∪D 2∪D 3∪D 4 where:D1 =
past(C)∩ f uture(B),D2 = past(B)∩ f uture(D), andD3 =
past(C)∩ anticone(B).
• SelectedChain(C)∩ f uture(D) ,∅: the contrary implies
that C→ D. However, that B < C implies that there is some
C → B′ such that B ≤ B′. But score(B′) ≥ score(B) >
score(D), which implies C̸⇒ D, contradicting D <⋆ C.
Now, let E1, E2 be the maximal and minimal elements of
SelectedChain(C)∩ f uture(D) respectively. If it does not hold that
C ⇒ E1 then there must be a block between them, contradicting
the maximality of E1. Similarly, E2 ⇒ D. IfD1 intersects past(E1)
then B < E1, contradicting the minimality of C. Assume D1 ∈
D1∩ f uture(E1), then score(E1) < score(D1) and since D1 < C
we get that C ̸⇒ E1, which is a contradiction. Similarly, if D2
intersects f uture(E2) then the maximality ofD is contradicted, and
ifD2 intersects past(E2) then E2 ⇒ D is contradicted. HenceD1⊂
anticone(E1),D2⊂ anticone(E2) andD3⊂ anticone(B) where it
holds that E1, E2, B∈ BlueSet(c). Therefore|Di∩ BlueSet(C)|≤ k
for i = 1, 2, 3, and since BlueSet(C)∩( past(B)∪{ B})⊂D 1∪D 2∪
D3∪{ B} it follows that|BlueSet(C)\ past(D)|≤ 3k + 1. Hence
score(C)− score(D)≤ 3k + 1, whereby score(C)≤ score(B) +
3k. □
Lemma 10 The advantage adv(t) is upper bounded by a stochastic
process which admits a stationary distribution with an exponentially
decaying tail.
Proof. The work in [ 18] contains an analysis of the
premining process, i.e., the maximal advantage of the
attacker over an honest block, in a block race; formally:
adv′(t) := maxC∈[0,t]{ f uture(C)∩A− f uture(C)∩H} (the
notation adv′(t) does not appear therein). In contrast, we are
interested in the processadv(t) = wA(t)− wH(t), which is similarly
bounded: adv(t) = score(C)− score(V) where C is the selected tip
of the attacker and V is the virtual block of the honest node. Let D
satisfy that D≤⋆ C and D <⋆ V (such an element must exist, e.g.
the genesis element). Then
adv(t) =|BlueSet(C)|−| BlueSet(V)|
=|BlueSet(C)\ past(D)|−| BlueSet(V)\ past(D)|
≤ max
C′

|BlueSet(C)\ past C′|−| BlueSet(V)\ past C′|
	
The analysis of the last term is similar to the analysis of adv′(t)
with two deviations: First, the growth rate of the honest network’s
blue score is not(1−α) rather(1−α)(1−δ) as proven in Lemma 9.
This has no qualitative effect on the analysis, it merely implies
that the stationary distribution is governed by an exponent with
base α
(1−α)(1−δ) rather than α
(1−α) . Secondly, the analysis therein
assumes that no freeloading occurs. Fortunately, the Freeloader
Bound guarantees that if the selected tip at time t was freeloading,
adv(t) is bounded by a constant 3k. Therefore, by assuming the
attacker always manages to saturate this constant, so that their
advantage never goes below 3k, we can shift the process adv′(t)
by 3k and analyze it as a block race, utilizing the result from [18].
□
The Markovian Process. In this section we prove the existence
of the Markovian process described in Lemma 8. In order to do
so, it is illuminating to first consider how one might prove the
liveness property of GHOSTDAG in the non-adversarial setting. In
this setting, it is easiest to demonstrate liveness by the emergence
of so called hourglass blocks.
Definition 13. A block B discovered in time t is called an hourglass
block if it is the only block discovered between t− 2D and t + 2D.
Lemma 14. In the non-adversarial setting where all miners are
honest, if an honest hourglass block was created at time t, then the
ordering of blocks created before t will remain unchanged after t.
Proof. Let B be the hourglass block created at time t. If B′ was
created before t, then by hypothesis it was created beforet− 2D, so
by the definition of D it follows that B′∈ past(B) (as all miners are
assumed to be honest). Similarly, if B′′ was created after t it was
created after t + 2D and is therefore in f uture(B). It follows that
B’s anticone is empty, or equivalently that B <⋆ B′′ for any B′′
created after B. Hence, the ordering over all blocks in created before
t is precisely the ordering induced by B, which is deterministic and
does not change. □
Corollary 15. In the non-adversarial setting where all miners are
honest, the probability that the ordering between two blocks created
before time t will change at time t + r decays exponentially with r .
Proof. Let B, C be two blocks created before timet. At any point
in time after t, the probability of the event Et where the next block
will be an hourglass block is some positive constant C depending
only on the system parameters; moreoever, the events Et and Es
are independent as long as |s− t| > 2D. As r grows,|[t, t + r]|
approaches r·λ exponentially fast. In particular, as r grows, with
high probability (i.e., apart from a term inO(e−F·r)) there’s a set
of blocks S of size at least r· f such that any two blocks in the set
were created at least 2D seconds apart (F is some positive integer,
0 < f < 1 is some positive constant). Since the events where blocks
in S are hourglass blocks are mutually independent, we get that
the probability that none of them is an hourglass block is at most
(1− c)f·r . □
In the adversarial setting, hourglass events are not enough to
secure the ordering. If the honest network posts an hourglass block
B, the adversary could "undo" it by posting a block in the anticone
of B. Honest blocks created after B might include this block in
their blue set, thus making the ordering of blocks in the past of B
uncertain again. Overcoming this requires a more specific event: we
require that the honest network created a chain of several blocks
=== PAGE 13 ===
PHANTOM GHOSTDAG
A Scalable Generalization of Nakamoto ConsensusNovember 10, 2021 , ,
while the adversary has produced none14. We call such an event a
burst, and the blocks in the chain theburst blocks. We want to assure
that the probability that the honest network is never convinced
by a block whose selected chain does not include any of the burst
blocks is bounded from below by some positive constant depending
only on system parameters. In the following lemma, we prove that
the amount of burst blocks required to achieve this depends only
on system parameters and on adv(t) where t is the time the burst
started.
Lemma 16. For any Z , there exists a constant time length s
depending only on Z and system parameters, such that for any t
there exists an event Dt ,Z which, if adv(t)≤ Z , implies that there
exists a block B created before t + s such that for the attacker to
create a block C which satisfies that B ≮⋆ C and adv(C)≥− 2k they
must win a block race starting with advantage −1. Furthermore, the
probability of Dt ,Z is bounded from below by a constant depending
only on Z and system parameters.
Proof. The event Dt ,Z is the event that no blocks were created
during the first 2D seconds, after which the honest network created
Z′ + 3k + 2 blocks arranged in a chain, while the attacker created
none, after which no blocks were created for 2D seconds, where
Z′ = max Z, k + 1. Assume furthermore that the entire event lasted
at most s =(2Z′ + 3k + 2)/αλ + 4D seconds (any s > 4D would
work, but this choice of s is reasonable as the probability for such
an event lasting longer decreases exponentially with Z). Finally, let
B the 3k + 2 from last block created in the event. We immediately
note that the independence of Dt ,Z and Dt +s ,Z is true by design.
We call this event a burst and the blocks created during the event
burst blocks.
Let C0 be an attacker block created after t + s such that B ≮⋆ C0
and the selected parent of C0 was created before t + s. Let C =
max(SelectedChain(C0)∩A) , then adv(C)≤ Z and in particular
score(B) > score(C). Let B′ be a burst block created after B and
assume that C∈ SelectedChain(B′), this implies thatB <⋆ B′ since
if C was discovered after B was created then any burst block would
choose the previous burst block (which has score at least score(B))
over C as a selected parent.
This implies that all burst blocks created after B are in the
anticone of C0. Let B′ be the latest burst block. It follows that
score(C0) ≤ score(B) + k so score(B′) ≥ score(B) + 2k + 1 ≥
score(C0) + k + 1. In particular, adv(C0)≤−( 2k− 1).
Let E be a block created after t + s which freeloads off D ∈
f uture(c0), but such that no block in SelectedChain(E) freeloaded
off a block in f utureC 0.
Let E′ be an element ofpast(D)∩A of maximal score (this set is
not empty as it contains the genesis block). Ifscore(E)−score(E′) >
k then there are more thank blocks in BlueSet(E)\ past(D), which
contradicts that D∈ BlueSet(C). Hence score(E)− score(E′) < k.
Note that score(E′) > score(E)− k > score(D)− k. So
adv(E′)≥ score E′−( score(D) + k)
≥ score E′− score(E)− k≥− 2k
14Note that this is not a necessary condition for the network to converge, hence the
constants which follow from the analysis are far from tight.
Since adv(C)≤−( 2k− 1) and no block below E freeloaded, this
implies that the attacker has won a block race with starting with
advantage−1.
□
We now prove Proposition 8, thereby concluding the proof of
Theorem 7.
Proposition 8 Assume that B convinced the network at time t,
then advB(t) is bound from above by a Markovian process on Z which
goes to−∞ exponentially fast.
Proof. Let Bt be the event that both Dt ,Z and adv(t)≤ Z hold.
Lemma 10 implies that the probability of adv(t)≤ Z is bound by a
constant depending only on system parameters, while Lemma 16
states that the probability of Dt ,Z depends only on Z. It is evident
from the construction ofDt ,Z that it depends only on blocks created
after t while adv(t)≤ Z depends only on block created aftert, hence
these events are independent, so the probability of their intersection
is also bound by a constant.
In order to construct M we construct another process M′ on
Z×{ 0, 1} where the{0, 1} part keeps track on whether the attacker
is in the condition described in Lemma 16. This means that as
advb <−k, the attacker is in a block race. M is then defined as the
projection of M′ on Z. From Lemma 9 it follows that the honest
chain grows at a rate of(1−α)(1−δ) while the attacker chain grows
at rateα. Letα′ = α
1−δ . This renormalizes things such that if the
attacker does not freeload the advantage is modeled as a walk on
Z which transitions right with probabilityα′. We define transition
probabilities of the state(n, i):
• If n > Z then the process transitions to (n + 1, i) with
probabilityα′ or to(n− 1, i) with probability 1−α′
• If−2k ≤ n < 3k then the attacker may freeload, we
assume that it always manages to do so and always gains
the maximal advantage of 3k, so(n, i) transitions to(3k, 1)
with probability 1
• If 3k≤ n < Z then let p the probability of Bt , the process
transitions to(n + 1, i) with probabilityα′p, to(n− 1, i) with
probability(1−α′)p, or to(−k− 1, 0) with probability p
• If n < −2k and i = 1 we also assume that the attacker
manages to steal a block to gain the highest possible
advantage, so the process always transitions to(3k, 1)
• Finally, if n <−2k and i = 0 then the attacker is not able
to freeload as long as n stays below−2k, so the process
transitions to(n + 1, 0) with probabilityα′ or to(n− 1, 0)
with probability 1−α′.
Note that the state (−(2k + 1), 0) transitions to(−2k, 0) with
probabilityα′ from which it transitions to(3k, 1) with probability 1.
It is true by design that this process bounds the attacker advantage
from above in the case where they insists not to include B in their
selected chain (since all deviations from any actual process which
is induced by any attacker strategy are positive), and that M goes
to−∞ exponentially fast.
□
REFERENCES
[1] Bitcoin’s relay network stats. http://bitcoinfibre.org/stats.html. Accessed:
2020-01-20.
[2] Kaspa github repository. https://github.com/kaspanet/kaspad/.
=== PAGE 14 ===
, , Yonatan Sompolinsky, Shai Wyborski, and Aviv Zohar
[3] Kaspa graph inspector (testnet). http://kgi-testnet.daglabs-dev.com/.
[4] Kaspa katnip block explorer (testnet). http://testnet.katnip.sh/.
[5] Kaspa performance dashboard (testnet). http://kasboard-testnet.daglabs-dev.
com/.
[6] Vivek Bagaria, Sreeram Kannan, David Tse, Giulia Fanti, and Pramod Viswanath.
Prism: Deconstructing the blockchain to approach physical limits. In Proceedings
of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security ,
pages 585–602, 2019.
[7] Ittay Eyal, Adem Efe Gencer, Emin Gün Sirer, and Robbert Van Renesse.
Bitcoin-ng: A scalable blockchain protocol. In 13th USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 16) , pages 45–59, 2016.
[8] Matthias Fitzi, Peter Gazi, Aggelos Kiayias, and Alexander Russell. Parallel
chains: Improving throughput and latency of blockchain protocols via parallel
composition. IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2018:1119, 2018.
[9] Juan Garay, Aggelos Kiayias, and Nikos Leonardos. The bitcoin backbone
protocol: Analysis and applications. In Annual International Conference on the
Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques , pages 281–310. Springer,
2015.
[10] Michael R Garey and David S Johnson. Computers and intractability, volume 29.
wh freeman New York, 2002.
[11] Aggelos Kiayias and Giorgos Panagiotakos. On trees, chains and fast transactions
in the blockchain. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2016/545, 2016.
[12] Yoad Lewenberg, Yonatan Sompolinsky, and Aviv Zohar. Inclusive block chain
protocols. In International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data
Security, pages 528–547. Springer, 2015.
[13] Chenxing Li, Peilun Li, Dong Zhou, Wei Xu, Fan Long, and Andrew Yao. Scaling
nakamoto consensus to thousands of transactions per second. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1805.03870, 2018.
[14] Rafael Pass, Lior Seeman, and Abhi Shelat. Analysis of the blockchain protocol
in asynchronous networks. IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2016:454, 2016.
[15] Rafael Pass and Elaine Shi. Hybrid consensus: Efficient consensus in the
permissionless model, 2016.
[16] Joseph Poon and Thaddeus Dryja. The bitcoin lightning network: Scalable
off-chain instant payments. Technical Report (draft), 2015.
[17] Meni Rosenfeld. Analysis of hashrate-based double spending. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1402.2009, 2014.
[18] Yonatan Sompolinsky, Yoad Lewenberg, and Aviv Zohar. Spectre: A fast and
scalable cryptocurrency protocol. IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive , 2016:1159,
2016.
[19] Yonatan Sompolinsky and Aviv Zohar. Secure high-rate transaction processing in
bitcoin. In International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security ,
pages 507–527. Springer, 2015.
[20] Haifeng Yu, Ivica Nikolic, Ruomu Hou, and Prateek Saxena. Ohie: Blockchain
scaling made simple. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12628, 2018.