Dynamic Provable Data Possession
C. Chris Erway Alptekin K ¨upc ¸¨u Charalampos Papamanthou Roberto Tamassia
Brown University, Providence RI
{cce,kupcu,cpap,rt}@cs.brown.edu
November 29, 2009
Abstract
As storage-outsourcing services and resource-sharing net works have become popular, the problem
of efﬁciently proving the integrity of data stored at untrus ted servers has received increased attention.
In the provable data possession (PDP) model, the client prep rocesses the data and then sends it to an
untrusted server for storage, while keeping a small amount of meta-data. The client later asks the server
to prove that the stored data has not been tampered with or del eted (without downloading the actual
data). However, the original PDP scheme applies only to static (or append-only) ﬁles.
We present a deﬁnitional framework and efﬁcient constructions for dynamic provable data possession
(DPDP), which extends the PDP model to support provable updates to stored data. We use a new version
of authenticated dictionaries based on rank information. The price of dynamic updates is a performance
change from O(1) to O(log n) (or O(nǫ log n)), for a ﬁle consisting of n blocks, while maintaining
the same (or better, respectively) probability of misbehav ior detection. Our experiments show that this
slowdown is very low in practice (e.g., 415KB proof size and 3 0ms computational overhead for a 1GB
ﬁle). We also show how to apply our DPDP scheme to outsourced ﬁ le systems and version control
systems (e.g., CVS).
1 Introduction
In cloud storage systems, the server (or peer) that stores the client’s data is not necessarily trusted. Therefore,
users would like to check if their data has been tampered with or deleted. However, outsourcing the storage
of very large ﬁles (or whole ﬁle systems) to remote servers presents an additional constraint: the client should
not download all stored data in order to validate it since this may be prohibitive in terms of bandwidth
and time, especially if the client performs this check frequently (therefore authenticated data structure
solutions [32] cannot be directly applied in this scenario).
Ateniese et al. [2] have formalized a model called provable data possession (PDP). In this model, data
(often represented as a ﬁle F ) is preprocessed by the client, and metadata used for veriﬁcation purpos es
is produced. The ﬁle is then sent to an untrusted server for storage, an d the client may delete the local
copy of the ﬁle. The client keeps some (possibly secret) information to chec k server’s responses later.
The server proves the data has not been tampered with by responding to c hallenges sent by the client.
The authors present several variations of their scheme under differe nt cryptographic assumptions. These
schemes provide probabilistic guarantees of possession, where the clien t checks a random subset of stored
blocks with each challenge.
However, PDP and related schemes [2, 7, 12, 31] apply only to the case of static, archival storage, i.e., a
ﬁle that is outsourced and never changes (simultaneously with our work, Ateniese et al. [3] present a scheme
1
Scheme Server Client Comm. Model Block operations Probability
comp. comp. append modify insert delete of detection
PDP [2] O(1) O(1) O(1) RO ✓ 1 − (1 − f )C
Scalable PDP [3] O(1) O(1) O(1) RO ✓∗ ✓∗ ✓∗ 1 − (1 − f )C
DPDP I O(log n) O(log n) O(log n) standard ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 1 − (1 − f )C
DPDP II O(nǫ log n) O(log n) O(log n) standard ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 1 − (1 − f )Ω(log n)
Table 1: Comparison of PDP schemes: original PDP scheme [2]; Scalable P DP [3]; our scheme based on
authenticated skip lists (DPDP I); and our scheme based on RSA trees (DPD P II). A star (*) indicates that
a certain operation can be performed only a limited (pre-determined) number o f times. We denote with n
the number of the blocks of the ﬁle, with f the fraction of the corrupted blocks, and with C a constant, i.e.,
independent of n. In all constructions, the storage space is O(1) at the client and O(n) at the server.
with somewhat limited dynamism, which is discussed in detail in the related work section). While the static
model ﬁts some application scenarios (e.g., libraries and scientiﬁc datasets), it is crucial to consider the
dynamic case, where the client updates the outsourced data—by inserting, modifying, or deleting stored
blocks or ﬁles—while maintaining data possession guarantees. Such a dyna mic PDP scheme is essential in
practical cloud computing systems for ﬁle storage [13, 16], database services [17], and peer-to-peer storage
[14, 20].
In this paper, we provide a deﬁnitional framework and efﬁcient constructions for dynamic provable data
possession (DPDP), which extends the PDP model to support provable updates on the stored data. Given a
ﬁle F consisting of n blocks, we deﬁne an update as either insertion of a new block (anywherein the ﬁle, not
only append), or modiﬁcation of an existing block, or deletion of any block. Therefore our update operation
describes the most general form of modiﬁcations a client may wish to perform on a ﬁle.
Our DPDP solution is based on a new variant of authenticated dictionaries, where we use rank informa-
tion to organize dictionary entries. Thus we are able to support efﬁcient a uthenticated operations on ﬁles at
the block level, such as authenticated insert and delete. We prove the security of our constructions using
standard assumptions.
We also show how to extend our construction to support data possession guarantees of a hierarchical ﬁle
system as well as ﬁle data itself. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrs t construction of a provable
storage system that enables efﬁcient proofs of a whole ﬁle system, enab ling veriﬁcation at different levels
for different users (e.g., every user can verify her own home directo ry) and at the same time not having
to download the whole data (as opposed to [10]). Our scheme yields a prov able outsourced versioning
system (e.g., CVS), which is evaluated in Section 8 by using traces of CVS repositories of three well-known
projects.
1.1 Contributions
The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
1. We introduce a formal framework for dynamic provable data possession (DPDP);
2. We provide the ﬁrst efﬁcient fully dynamic PDP solution;
3. We present a rank-based authenticated dictionary built over a skip list. This construction yields a
DPDP scheme with logarithmic computation and communication and the same detection pr obability
as the original PDP scheme (DPDP I in Table 1);
4. We give an alternative construction (Section 6) of a rank-based authenticated dictionary using an RSA
tree [26]. This construction results in a DPDP scheme with improved detection probability but higher
server computation (see DPDP II in Table 1);
2
5. We present practical applications of our DPDP constructions to outsourced ﬁle systems and versioning
systems (e.g., CVS, with variable block size support); (6) We perform an experimental evaluation of
our skip list-based scheme.
Now, we outline the performance of our schemes. Denote with n the number of blocks. The server
computation, i.e., the time taken by the server to process an update or to compute a proof fo r a block,
is O(log n) for DPDP I and O(nǫ log n) for DPDP II; the client computation, i.e., the time taken by the
client to verify a proof returned by the server, isO(log n) for both schemes; the communication complexity,
i.e., the size of the proof returned by the server to the client, is O(log n) for both schemes; the client
storage, i.e., the size of the meta-data stored locally by the client, is O(1) for both schemes; ﬁnally, the
probability of detection, i.e., the probability of detecting server misbehavior, is 1 − (1 − f )C for DPDP I
and 1 − (1 − f )Ω(log n) for DPDP II, for ﬁxed logarithmic communication complexity, where f is the ratio
of corrupted blocks and C is a constant, i.e., independent of n.
We observe that for DPDP I, we could use a dynamic Merkle tree (e.g., [15 , 21]) instead of a skip list
to achieve the same asymptotic performance. We have chosen the skip list dueto its simple implementation
and the fact that algorithms for updates in the two-party model (where clientscan access only a logarithmic-
sized portion of the data structure) have been previously studied in detail for authenticated skip lists [25] but
not for Merkle trees.
1.2 Related work
The PDP scheme by Ateniese et al. [2] provides an optimal protocol for the static case that achieves O(1)
costs for all the complexity measures listed above. They review previous wo rk on protocols ﬁtting their
model, but ﬁnd these approaches lacking: either they require expensiv e server computation or communi-
cation over the entire ﬁle [9, 23], linear storage for the client [30], or do not provide security guarantees
for data possession [29]. Note that using [2] in a dynamic scenario is inse cure due to replay attacks. As
observed in [8], in order to avoid replay attacks, an authenticated tree structure that incurs logarithmic costs
must be employed and thus constant costs are not feasible in a dynamic scenario.
Juels and Kaliski present proofs of retrievability (PORs) [12], focusing on static archival storage of large
ﬁles. Their scheme’s effectiveness rests largely on preprocessing steps the client conducts before sending a
ﬁle F to the server: “sentinel” blocks are randomly inserted to detect corruption, F is encrypted to hide these
sentinels, and error-correcting codes are used to recover from corruption. As expected, the error-correcting
codes improve the error-resiliency of their system. Unfortunately, these o perations prevent any efﬁcient
extension to support updates, beyond simply replacing F with a new ﬁle F ′. Furthermore, the number of
queries a client can perform is limited, and ﬁxed a priori. Shacham and Wate rs have an improved version
of this protocol called Compact POR [31], but their solution is also static (see [7] for a summary of POR
schemes and related trade-offs).
Simultaneously with our work, Ateniese et al. have developed a dynamic PDP s olution called Scalable
PDP [3]. Their idea is to come up with all future challenges during setup and s tore pre-computed answers
as metadata (at the client, or at the server in an authenticated and encrypted manner). Because of this
approach, the number of updates and challenges a client can perform is limited and ﬁxed a priori. Also,
one cannot perform block insertions anywhere (only append-type ins ertions are possible). Furthermore,
each update requires re-creating all the remaining challenges, which is pr oblematic for large ﬁles. Under
these limitations (otherwise the lower bound of [8] would be violated), they provide a protocol with optimal
asymptotic complexity O(1) in all complexity measures giving the same probabilistic guarantees as our
scheme. Lastly, their work is in the random oracle model whereas our sche me is provably secure in the
standard model (see Table 1 for full comparison).
Finally, our work is closely related to memory checking, for which lower boun ds are presented in [8,
22]. Speciﬁcally, in [8] it is proved that all non-adaptive and deterministic checkers have read and write
3
query complexity summing up to Ω(log n/ log log n) (necessary for sublinear client storage), justifying the
O(log n) cost in our scheme. Note that for schemes based on cryptographic hash ing, an Ω(log n) lower
bound on the proof size has been shown [6, 33]. Related bounds for o ther primitives have been shown by
Blum et al. [4].
2 Model
We build on the PDP deﬁnitions from [2]. We begin by introducing a general DPDP scheme and then show
how the original PDP model is consistent with this deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 1 (DPDP Scheme) In a DPDP scheme, there are two parties. The client wants to off-load her
ﬁles to the untrustedserver. A complete deﬁnition of a DPDP scheme should describe the following (possibly
randomized) efﬁcient procedures:
• KeyGen(1k) → { sk, pk} is a probabilistic algorithm run by the client. It takes as input a security
parameter, and outputs a secret key sk and a public key pk. The client stores the secret and public
keys, and sends the public key to the server;
• PrepareUpdate(sk, pk, F , info, Mc) → { e(F ), e(info), e(M )} is an algorithm run by the client to pre-
pare (a part of) the ﬁle for untrusted storage. As input, it takes secret an d public keys, (a part of) the ﬁle
F with the deﬁnition info of the update to be performed (e.g., full re-write, modify block i, delete block i,
add a block after block i, etc.), and the previous metadata Mc. The output is an “encoded” version of (a
part of) the ﬁle e(F ) (e.g., by adding randomness, adding sentinels, encrypting for conﬁden tiality, etc.),
along with the information e(info) about the update (changed to ﬁt the encoded version), and the new
metadata e(M ). The client sends e(F ), e(info), e(M ) to the server;
• PerformUpdate(pk, Fi−1, Mi−1, e(F ), e(info), e(M )) → { Fi, Mi, M ′
c, PM ′c } is an algorithm run by the
server in response to an update request from the client. The input contains the public key pk, the previous
version of the ﬁle Fi−1, the metadata Mi−1 and the client-provided values e(F ), e(info), e(M ). Note that
the values e(F ), e(info), e(M ) are the values produced by PrepareUpdate. The output is the new version
of the ﬁle Fi and the metadata Mi, along with the metadata to be sent to the client M ′
c and its proof PM ′c.
The server sends M ′
c, PM ′c to the client;
• VerifyUpdate(sk, pk, F , info, Mc, M ′
c, PM ′c ) → { accept, reject} is run by the client to verify the server’s
behavior during the update. It takes all inputs of the PrepareUpdate algorithm,1 plus the M ′
c, PM ′c sent
by the server. It outputs acceptance (F can be deleted in that case) or rejection signals;
• Challenge(sk, pk, Mc) → { c} is a probabilistic procedure run by the client to create a challenge for the
server. It takes the secret and public keys, along with the latest client metadata Mc as input, and outputs
a challenge c that is then sent to the server;
• Prove(pk, Fi, Mi, c) → { P } is the procedure run by the server upon receipt of a challenge from the
client. It takes as input the public key, the latest version of the ﬁle and the metadata, and the challenge c.
It outputs a proof P that is sent to the client;
• Verify(sk, pk, Mc, c, P) → {accept, reject} is the procedure run by theclient upon receipt of the proof P
from the server. It takes as input the secret and public keys, the client metadata Mc, the challenge c, and
the proof P sent by the server. An output of accept ideally means that the server s till has the ﬁle intact.
We will deﬁne the security requirements of a DPDP scheme later.
1However, in our modelF denotes part of some encoded version of the ﬁle and not part of the actual data (though for generality
purposes we do not make it explicit).
4
We assume there is a hidden input and outputclientstate in all functions run by the client, andserverstate
in all functions run by the server. Some inputs and outputs may be empty in some schemes. For example, the
PDP scheme of [2] does not store any metadata at the client side. Alsosk, pk can be used for storing multiple
ﬁles, possibly on different servers. All these functions can be assume d to take some public parameters as
an extra input if operating in the public parameters model, although our constr uction does not require such
modiﬁcations. Apart from {accept, reject}, algorithm VerifyUpdate can also output a new client metadata
Mc. In most scenarios, this new metadata will be set as Mc = M ′
c.
Retrieval of a (part of a) ﬁle is similar to the challenge-response protocol above, composed of
Challenge, Verify, Prove algorithms, except that along with the proof, the server also sends the req uested
(part of the) ﬁle, and the veriﬁcation algorithm must use this (part of the) ﬁle in the veriﬁcation process. We
also note that a PDP scheme is consistent with the DPDP scheme deﬁnition, with algorithms PrepareUpdate,
PerformUpdate and VerifyUpdate specifying an update that is a full re-write (or append).
As stated above, PDP is a restricted case of DPDP. The PDP scheme of [2] has the same algorithm
deﬁnition for key generation, deﬁnes a restricted version of PrepareUpdate that can create the metadata
for only one block at a time, and deﬁnes Prove and Verify algorithms similar to our deﬁnition. It lacks an
explicit deﬁnition of Challenge (though one is very easy to infer). PerformUpdate consists of performing
a full re-write or an append (so that replay attacks can be avoided), and VerifyUpdate is used accordingly,
i.e., it always accepts in case of a full re-write or it is run as in DPDP in case of an append. It is clear that
our deﬁnition allows a broad range of DPDP (and PDP) schemes.
We now deﬁne the security of a DPDP scheme, inspired by the security deﬁn itions of [2, 7]. Note that
the restriction to the PDP scheme gives a security deﬁnition for PDP schemes c ompatible with the ones
in [2, 3].
Deﬁnition 2 (Security of DPDP) We say that a DPDP scheme is secure if for any probabilistic polynomial
time (PPT) adversary who can win the following data possession game with non-negligible probability, there
exists an extractor that can extract (at least) the challenged parts of the ﬁle by resetting and challenging the
adversary polynomially many times.
DATA POSSESSION GAME: Played between the challenger who plays the role of the client and the
adversary who acts as a server.
1. KEYGEN : The challenger runs KeyGen(1k) → {sk, pk} and sends the public keypk to the adversary;
2. ACF Q UERIES : The adversary is very powerful. The adversary can mount adaptivechosen ﬁle (ACF)
queries as follows. The adversary speciﬁes a message F and the related information info specifying
what kind of update to perform (see Deﬁnition 1) and sends these to the cha llenger. The challenger
runs PrepareUpdate on these inputs and sends the resulting e(F ), e(info), e(M ) to the adversary.
Then the adversary replies with M ′
c, PM ′c which are veriﬁed by the challenger using the algorithm
VerifyUpdate. The result of the veriﬁcation is told to the adversary. The adversary ca n further
request challenges, return proofs, and be told about the veriﬁcation results. The adversary can repeat
the interaction deﬁned above polynomially-many times;
3. SETUP : Finally, the adversary decides on messages F ∗
i and related information info∗
i for all i =
1, . . . , Rof adversary’s choice of polynomially-large (in the security parameter k) R ≥ 1. The ACF
interaction is performed again, with the ﬁrst info∗
1 specifying a full re-write (this corresponds to the
ﬁrst time the client sends a ﬁle to the server). The challenger updates his lo cal metadata only for the
verifying updates (hence, non-verifying updates are considered not tohave taken place—data has not
changed);
4. CHALLENGE : Call the ﬁnal version of the ﬁle F , which is created according to the verifying updates
the adversary requested in the previous step. The challenger holds the la test metadata Mc sent by
5
the adversary and veriﬁed as accepting. Now the challenger creates a c hallenge using the algorithm
Challenge(sk, pk, Mc) → { c} and sends it to the adversary. The adversary returns a proof P . If
Verify(sk, pk, Mc, c, P) accepts, then the adversary wins. The challenger has the ability to reset th e
adversary to the beginning of the challenge phase and repeat this step po lynomially-many times for
the purpose of extraction. Overall, the goal is to extract (at least) the cha llenged parts of F from the
adversary’s responses which are accepting.
Note that our deﬁnition coincides with extractor deﬁnitions inproofs of knowledge. For an adversary that
answers a non-negligible fraction of the challenges, a polynomial-time extrac tor must exist. Furthermore,
this deﬁnition can be applied to the POR case [7, 12, 31], in which by repeatin g the challenge-response
process, the extractor can extract the whole ﬁle with the help of error-co rrecting codes. The probability of
catching a cheating server is analyzed in Section 5.
Finally, if a DPDP scheme is to be truly publicly veriﬁable, the Verify algorithm should not make use of
the secret key. Since that is the case for our construction (see Section 4), we can derive a public veriﬁability
protocol usable for ofﬁcial arbitration purposes; this work is currently under development.
3 Rank-based authenticated skip lists
In order to implement our ﬁrst DPDP construction, we use a modiﬁed authentic ated skip list data struc-
ture [11]. This new data structure, which we call a rank-based authenticated skip list, is based on authen-
ticated skip lists but indexes data in a different way. Note that we could have based the construction on
any authenticated search data structure, e.g., Merkle tree [18] instead. T his would perfectly work for the
static case. But in the dynamic case, we would need an authenticated red-bla ck tree, and unfortunately no
algorithms have been previously presented for rebalancing a Merkle tree while efﬁciently maintaining and
updating authentication information (except for the three-party model, e.g., [15]). Yet, such algorithms have
been extensively studied for the case of the authenticated skip list data structure [25]. Before presenting the
new data structure, we brieﬂy introduce authenticated skip lists.
The authenticated skip list is a skip list [27] (see Figure 1) with the differenc e that every node v above
the bottom level (which has two pointers, namely rgt(v) and dwn(v)) also stores a label f (v) that is a
cryptographic hash and is computed using some collision-resistant hash function h (e.g., SHA-1 in practice)
as a function of f (rgt(v)) and f (dwn(v)). Using this data structure, one can answer queries like “does 21
belong to the set represented with this skip list?” and also provide a proof tha t the given answer is correct.
To be able to verify the proofs to these answers, the client must always hold the label f (s) of the top leftmost
node of the skip list (node w7 in Figure 1). We call f (s) the basis (or root), and it corresponds to the client’s
metadata in our DPDP construction ( Mc = f (s)). In our construction, the leaves of the skip list represent
the blocks of the ﬁle. When the client asks for a block, the server needs to send that block, along with a
proof that the block is intact.
We can use an authenticated skip list to check the integrity of the ﬁle blocks. However, this data structure
does not support efﬁcient veriﬁcation of the indices of the blocks, whic h are used as query and update
parameters in our DPDP scenario. The updates we want to support in our DPDP scenario are insertions
of a new block after the i-th block and deletion or modiﬁcation of the i-th block (there is no search key in
our case, in contrast to [11], which basically implements an authenticated dictio nary). If we use indices of
blocks as search keys in an authenticated dictionary, we have the following problem. Suppose we have a
ﬁle consisting of 100 blocks m1, m2, . . . , m100 and we want to insert a block after the 40-th block. This
means that the indices of all the blocks m41, m42, . . . , m100 should be incremented, and therefore an update
becomes extremely inefﬁcient. To overcome this difﬁculty, we deﬁne a new hashing scheme that takes into
account rank information.
6
v 1v 8
0
4
v 3v 4v 5
v 7
v 6 v 9
w 3
w 4
w 5
w 6
w 7
3
12
11 10
5 4
1 1111 1 1 1 11 3 2
5
2 3
2
Figure 1: Example of rank-based skip list.
3.1 Authenticating ranks
Let F be a ﬁle consisting of n blocks m1, m2, . . . , mn. We store at the i-th bottom-level node of the skip
list a representation T (mi) of block mi (we will deﬁne T (mi) later). Block mi will be stored elsewhere by
the untrusted server. Each node v of the skip list stores the number of nodes at the bottom level that can be
reached from v. We call this value the rank of v and denote it with r(v). In Figure 1, we show the ranks of
the nodes of a skip list. An insertion, deletion, or modiﬁcation of a ﬁle block aff ects only the nodes of the
skip list along a search path. We can recompute bottom-up the ranks of the af fected nodes in constant time
per node.
The top leftmost node of a skip list will be referred to as thestart node. For example, w7 is the start node
of the skip list in Figure 1. For a node v, denote with low(v) and high(v) the indices of the leftmost and
rightmost nodes at the bottom level reachable from v, respectively. Clearly, for the start node s of the skip
list, we have r(s) = n, low(s) = 1 and high(s) = nbe the nodes that can be reached from v by following
the right or the down pointer respectively. Using the ranks stored at the nodes, we can reach the i-th node of
the bottom level by traversing a path that begins at the start node, as follows. For the current node v, assume
we know low(v) and high(v). Let w = rgt(v) and z = dwn(v). We set
high(w) = high(v) ,
low(w) = high(v) − r(w) + 1 ,
high(z) = low(v) + r(z) − 1 ,
low(z) = low(v) .
If i ∈ [low(w), high(w)], we follow the right pointer and set v = w, else we follow the down pointer and
set v = z. We continue until we reach the i-th bottom node. Note that we do not have to store high and low.
We compute them on the ﬂy using the ranks.
In order to authenticate skip lists with ranks, we extend the hashing scheme deﬁned in [11]. We consider
a skip list that stores data items at the bottom-level nodes. In our application, the node v associated with the
i-th block mi stores item x(v) = T (mi). Let l(v) be the level (height) of node v in the skip list ( l(v) = 0
for the nodes at the bottom level).
Let || denote concatenation. We extend a hash function h to support multiple arguments by deﬁning
h(x1, . . . , xk) = h(h(x1)|| . . .||h(xk)) .
We are now ready to deﬁne our new hashing scheme:
Deﬁnition 3 (Hashing scheme with ranks) Given a collision resistant hash function h, the label f (v) of a
node v of a rank-based authenticated skip list is deﬁned as follows.
7
Case 0: v = null
f (v) = 0 ;
Case 1: l(v) > 0
f (v) = h(l(v), r(v), f(dwn(v)), f(rgt(v))) ;
Case 2: l(v) = 0
f (v) = h(l(v), r(v), x(v), f(rgt(v))) .
Before inserting any block (i.e., if initially the skip list was empty), the basis, i.e., th e label f (s) of the top
leftmost node s of the skip list, can easily be computed by hashing the sentinel values of the skip list; —the
ﬁle consists of only two “ﬁctitious” blocks— block 0 and block +∞.
node v v3 v4 v5 w3 w4 w5 w6 w7
l(v) 0 0 0 2 2 3 3 4
q(v) 0 1 1 1 1 5 1 1
g(v) 0 T (m4) T (m5) f (v1) f (v6) f (v7) f (v8) f (v9)
Table 2: Proof for the 5-th block of the ﬁle F stored in the skip list of Figure 1.
3.2 Queries
Suppose now the ﬁle F and a skip list on the ﬁle have been stored at the untrusted server. The clie nt wants
to verify the integrity of block i and therefore issues query atRank(i) to the server. The server executes
Algorithm 1, described below, to compute T (i) and a proof for T (i) (for convenience we use T (i) to
denote T (mi)).
Let vk, . . . , v1 be the path from the start node, vk, to the node associated with block i, v1. The reverse
path v1, . . . , vk is called the veriﬁcation path of block i. For each node vj, j = 1, . . . , k, we deﬁne boolean
d(vj) and values q(vj) and g(vj) as follows, where we conventionally set r(null) = 0 :
d(vj) =
{
rgt j = 1 or j > 1 and vj−1 = rgt(vj)
dwn j > 1 and vj−1 = dwn(vj) ,
q(vj) =



r(rgt(vj)) if j = 1
1 if j > 1 and l(vj) = 0
r(dwn(vj)) if j > 1, l(vj) > 0 and d(vj) = rgt
r(rgt(vj)) if j > 1, l(vj) > 0 and d(vj) = dwn
,
g(vj) =



f (rgt(vj)) if j = 1
x(vj) if j > 1 and l(vj) = 0
f (dwn(vj)) if j > 1, l(vj) > 0 and d(vj) = rgt
f (rgt(vj)) if j > 1, l(vj) > 0 and d(vj) = dwn
.
The proof for block i with data T (i) is the sequence Π(i) = ( A(v1), . . . , A(vk)) where A(v) =
(l(v), q(v), d(v), g(v)). So the proof consists of tuples associated with the nodes of the veriﬁcation path.
Boolean d(v) indicates whether the previous node is to the right or below v. For nodes above the bottom
level, q(v) and g(v) are the rank and label of the successor of v that is not on the path. The proof Π(5) for
the skip list of Figure 1 is shown in Table 2. Due to the properties of skip lists, a proof has expected size
O(log n) with high probability (whp).
8
Algorithm 1: (T , Π) = atRank(i)
1: Let v1, v2, . . . , vk be the veriﬁcation path for block i;
2: return representation T of block i and proof Π = ( A(v1), A(v2), . . . , A(vk)) for T ;
3.3 Veriﬁcation
After receiving from the server the representation T of block i and a proof Π for it, the client executes
Algorithm 2 to verify the proof using the stored metadata Mc.
Algorithm 2: {accept, reject} = verify(i, Mc, T , Π)
1: Let Π = ( A1, . . . , Ak), where Aj = (lj, qj, dj, gj) for j = 1, . . . , k;
2: λ0 = 0; ρ0 = 1; γ0 = T ; ξ0 = 0;
3: for j = 1, . . . , kdo
4: λj = lj; ρj = ρj−1 + qj; δj = dj;
5: if δj = rgt then
6: γj = h(λj, ρj, γj−1, gj);
7: ξj = ξj−1;
8: else {δj = dwn}
9: γj = h(λj, ρj, gj, γj−1);
10: ξj = ξj−1 + qj;
11: end if
12: end for
13: if γk ⁄= Mc then
14: return reject;
15: else if ρk − ξk ⁄= i then
16: return reject;
17: else {γk = Mc and ρk − ξk = i}
18: return accept;
19: end if
Algorithm 2 iteratively computes tuples (λj, ρj, δj, γj) for each node vj on the veriﬁcation path plus a
sequence of integers ξj. If the returned block representation T and proof Π are correct, at each iteration of
the for-loop, the algorithm computes the following values associated with a node vj of the veriﬁcation path:
• integer λj = l(vj), i.e., the level of vj;
• integer ρj = r(vj), i.e., the rank of vj;
• boolean δj, which indicates whether the previous node vj−1 is to the right or below vj;
• hash value γj = f (vj), i.e., the label of vj;
• integer ξj, which is equal to the sum of the ranks of all the nodes that are to the right o f the nodes of
the path seen so far, but are not on the path.
Lemma 1 If T is the correct representation of blocki and sequence Π of length k is the correct proof forT ,
then the following properties hold for the values computed in iteration k of the for-loop of Algorithm 2:
1. Value ρk is equal to the number of nodes at the bottom level of the skip list, i.e., the number n of blocks
of the ﬁle;
2. Value ξk is equal to n − i; and
3. Value γk is equal to the label of the start node of the skip list.
9
node v v2 v3 v4 v5 w w3 w4 w5 w6 w7
l(v) 0 0 0 0 1 2 2 3 3 4
r(v) 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 11 12 13
f (v) T T (m5) T (m4) T (m3) f (v2) f (v1) f (v6) f (v7) f (v8) f (v9)
Table 3: The proof Π′(5) as produced by Algorithm 4 for the update “insert a new block with data T after
block 5 at level 1”.
3.4 Updates
The possible updates in our DPDP scheme are insertions of a new block afte r a given block i, deletion of a
block i, and modiﬁcation of a block i.
To perform an update, the client issues ﬁrst query atRank(i) (for an insertion or modiﬁcation) or
atRank(i − 1) (for a deletion), which returns the representation T of block i or i − 1 and its proof Π′.
Also, for an insertion, the client decides the height of the tower of the skip lis t associated with the new
block. Next, the client veriﬁes proof Π′ and computes what would be the label of the start node of the
skip list after the update, using a variation of the technique of [25]. Finally, the client asks the server to
perform the update on the skip list by sending to the server the parameters o f the update (for an insertion,
the parameters include the tower height).
We outline in Algorithm 3 the update algorithm performed by the server (performUpdate) and in Algo-
rithm 4 the update algorithm performed by the client (verUpdate). Input parameters T ′ and Π′ of verUpdate
are provided by the server, as computed by performUpdate.
Since updates affect only nodes along a veriﬁcation path, these algorithms run in expected O(log n)
time whp and the expected size of the proof returned by performUpdate is O(log n) whp.
Algorithm 3: (T ′, Π′) = performUpdate(i, T , upd)
1: if upd is a deletion then
2: set j = i − 1;
3: else {upd is an insertion or modiﬁcation}
4: set j = i;
5: end if
6: set (T ′, Π′) = atRank(j);
7: if upd is an insertion then
8: insert element T in the skip after the i-th element;
9: else if upd is a modiﬁcation then
10: replace with T the i-th element of the skip list;
11: else {upd is a deletion}
12: delete the i-th element of the skip list;
13: end if
14: update the labels, levels and ranks of the affected nodes;
15: return (T ′, Π′);
To give some intuition of how Algorithm 4 produces proof Π′(i), the reader can verify that Table 3
corresponds to Π′(5), the proof that the client produces from Table 2 in order to verify the upd ate “insert
a new block with data T after block 5 at level 1 of the skip list of Figure 1”. This update causes the
creation of two new nodes in the skip list, namely the node that holds the data for the 6-th block, v2,
and node w (5-th line of Table 3) that needs to be inserted in the skip list at level 1. Note th at f (v2) =
h(0||1||T , 0||1||T (data(v1))) is computed as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 3 and that the ranks along the search
path are increased due to the addition of one more block.
10
Algorithm 4:
{accept, reject} = verUpdate(i, Mc, T , upd, T ′, Π′)
1: if upd is a deletion then
2: set j = i − 1;
3: else {upd is an insertion or modiﬁcation}
4: set j = i;
5: end if
6: if verify(j, Mc, T ′, Π′) = reject then
7: return reject;
8: else {verify(j, Mc, T ′, Π′) = accept}
9: from i, T , T ′, and Π′, compute and store the updated label M ′
c of the start node;
10: return accept;
11: end if
4 DPDP scheme construction
In this section, we present our DPDP I construction. First, we describe o ur algorithms for the procedures
introduced in Deﬁnition 1. Next, we develop compact representatives for the blocks to improve efﬁciency
(blockless veriﬁcation). In the following, n is the current number of blocks of the ﬁle. The logarithmic
complexity for most of the operations are due to well-known results about au thenticated skip lists [11, 26].
Most of the material of this section also applies to the DPDP II scheme presented in Section 6.
4.1 Core construction
The server maintains the ﬁle and the metadata, consisting of an authenticated sk ip list with ranks storing
the blocks. Thus, in this preliminary construction, we have T (b) = b for each block b. The client keeps a
single hash value, called basis, which is the label of the start node of the skip list. We implement the DPDP
algorithms as follows.
• KeyGen(1k) → { sk, pk}: Our scheme does not require any keys to be generated. So, this proce dure’s
output is empty, and hence none of the other procedures make use of these keys;
• PrepareUpdate(sk, pk, F , info, Mc) → { e(F ), e(info), e(M )}: This is a dummy procedure that outputs
the ﬁle F and information info it receives as input. Mc and e(M ) are empty (not used);
• PerformUpdate(pk, Fi−1, Mi−1, e(F ), e(info), e(M )) → { Fi, Mi, M ′
c, PM ′c }: Inputs Fi−1, Mi−1 are the
previously stored ﬁle and metadata on the server (empty if this is the ﬁrst run). e(F ), e(info), e(M ), which
are output by PrepareUpdate, are sent by the client ( e(M ) being empty). The procedure updates the ﬁle
according to e(info), outputting Fi, runs the skip list update procedure on the previous skip list Mi−1 (or
builds the skip list from scratch if this is the ﬁrst run), outputs the resulting sk ip list as Mi, the new basis
as M ′
c, and the proof returned by the skip list update as PM ′c. This corresponds to calling Algorithm 3
on inputs a block index j, the new data T (in case of an insertion or a modiﬁcation) and the type of the
update upd (all this information is included in e(info)). Note that the index j and the type of the update
upd is taken from e(info) and the new data T is e(F ). Finally, Algorithm 3 outputs M ′
c and PM ′c = Π(j),
which are output by PerformUpdate. The expected runtime is O(log n) whp;
• VerifyUpdate(sk, pk, F , info, Mc, M ′
c, PM ′c ) → { accept, reject}: Client metadata Mc is the label of
the start node of the previous skip list (empty for the ﬁrst time), whereas M ′
c is empty. The client runs
Algorithm 4 using the index j of the update, Mc, previous data T , the update type upd, the new data T ′
of the update and the proof PM ′c sent by the server as input (most of the inputs are included ininfo). If the
11
procedure accepts, the client sets Mc = M ′
c (new and correct metadata has been computed). The client
may now delete the new block from its local storage. This procedure is a dire ct call of Algorithm 4. It
runs in expected time O(log n) whp;
• Challenge(sk, pk, Mc) → {c}: This procedure does not need any input apart from knowing the number of
blocks in the ﬁle (n). It might additionally take a parameterC which is the number of blocks to challenge.
The procedure creates C random block IDs between 1, . . . , n. This set of C random block IDs are sent to
the server and is denoted with c. The runtime is O(C);
• Prove(pk, Fi, Mi, c) → { P }: This procedure uses the last version of the ﬁle Fi and the skip list Mi, and
the challenge c sent by the client. It runs the skip list prover to create a proof on the challe nged blocks.
Namely, let i1, i2, . . . , iC be the indices of the challenged blocks. Prove calls Algorithm 1 C times (with
arguments i1, i2, . . . , iC) and sends back C proofs. All these C proofs form the output P . The runtime is
O(C log n) whp;
• Verify(sk, pk, Mc, c, P) → { accept, reject}: This function takes the last basis Mc the client has as input,
the challenge c sent to the server, and the proofP received from the server. It then runs Algorithm 2 using
as inputs the indices in c, the metadata Mc, the data T and the proof sent by the server (note that T and
the proof are contained in P ). This outputs a new basis. If this basis matches Mc then the client accepts.
Since this is performed for all the indices in c, this procedure takes O(C log n) expected time whp.
The above construction requires the client to download all the challenged blocks for the veriﬁcation. A more
efﬁcient method for representing blocks is discussed in the next section.
4.2 Blockless veriﬁcation
We can improve the efﬁciency of the core construction by employing homomorphic tags, as in [2]. However,
the tags described here are simpler and more efﬁcient to compute. Note that it is possible to use other
homomorphic tags like BLS signatures [5] as in Compact POR [31].
We represent a blockb with its tag T (b). Tags are small in size compared to data blocks, which provides
two main advantages. First, the skip list can be kept in memory. Second, instead of downloading the blocks,
the client can just download the tags. The integrity of the tags themselves is protected by the skip list, while
the tags protect the integrity of the blocks.
In order to use tags, we modify ourKeyGen algorithm to output pk = (N, g), where N = pq is a product
of two primes and g is an element of high order in Z∗
N. The public key pk is sent to the server; there is no
secret key.
The tag T (b) of a block b is deﬁned by
T (b) = gb mod N .
The skip list now stores the tags of the blocks at the bottom-level nodes. The refore, the proofs provided by
the server certify the tags instead of the blocks themselves. Note that instead of storing the tags explicitly,
the server can alternatively compute them as needed from the public key and the blocks.
The Prove procedure computes a proof for the tags of the challenged blocks mij (1 ≤ i1, . . . , iC ≤ n
denote the challenged indices, where C is the number of challenged blocks and n is the total number of
blocks). The server also sends a combined block M = ∑ C
j=1 ajmij, where aj are random values sent by
the client as part of the challenge. The size of this combined block is roughly the size of a single block.
Thus, we have a much smaller overhead than for sendingC blocks. Also, the Verify algorithm computes the
value
T =
C∏
j=1
T (mij )aj mod N ,
12
and accepts if T = gM mod N and the skip list proof veriﬁes.
The Challenge procedure can also be made more efﬁcient by using the ideas in [2]. First, instead of
sending random values aj separately, the client can simply send a random key to a pseudo-random function
that will generate those values. Second, a key to a pseudo-random per mutation can be sent to select the
indices of the challenged blocks 1 ≤ ij ≤ n (j = 1 , . . . , C). The deﬁnitions of these pseudo-random
families can be put into the public key. See [2] for more details on this challenge procedure. We can now
outline our main result (for the proof of security see Section 5):
Theorem 1 Assume the existence of a collision-resistant hash function and that the facto ring assumption
holds. The dynamic provable data possession scheme presented in this s ection (DPDP I) has the following
properties, where n is the current number of blocks of the ﬁle, f is the fraction of tampered blocks, and
C = O(1) is the number of blocks challenged in a query:
1. The scheme is secure according to Deﬁnition 2;
2. The probability of detecting a tampered block is 1 − (1 − f )C;
3. The expected update time is O(log n) at both the server and the client whp;
4. The expected query time at the server, the expected veriﬁcation time at the client and the expected
communication complexity are each O(log n) whp;
5. The client space is O(1) and the expected server space is O(n) whp.
Note that the above results hold in expectation and with high probability due to the properties of skip
lists [27].
5 Security
In this section we prove the security of our DPDP scheme. While our proof refers speciﬁcally to the DPDP I
scheme, it also applies to the DPDP II scheme discussed in the next section. I ndeed, the only difference
between the two schemes is the authenticated structure used for protecting the integrity of the tags.
We begin with the following lemma, which follows from the two-party authenticated skip list construc-
tion (Theorem 1 of [25]) and our discussion in Section 3.
Lemma 2 Assuming the existence of a collision-resistant hash function, the proofs ge nerated using our
rank-based authenticated skip list guarantees the integrity of its leaves T (mi) with non-negligible proba-
bility.
To prove security, we are also using thefactoring assumption:
Deﬁnition 4 (Factoring assumption) For all PPT adversariesA and large-enough number N = pq which
is a product of two primes p and q, the probability that A can output p or q given N is negligible in the size
of p and q.
Theorem 2 (Security of DPDP protocol) The DPDP protocol is secure in the standard model according to
Deﬁnition 2, assuming the existence of a collision-resistant hash function and that the factoring assumption
holds.
13
Proof: The challenger is given a hash functionh, and an integer N = pq but not p or q. The challenger then
samples a high-order element g. He interacts with the adversary in the data possession game honestly, using
the given hash function, and creates and updates the tags while using N as the modulus and g as the base.
Suppose now the challenger challenges C blocks, namely the blocks with indices i1, i2, . . . , iC. We
recall that in response to each challenge, the proof contains:
1. The tags Ti1, Ti2, . . . , TiC for each block i1, i2, . . . , iC, along with the respective skip list proofs that
correspond to each tag Ti1, Ti2, . . . , TiC ;
2. A “weighted” sum of the form S1 = ai11bi1 + ai12bi2 + . . . + ai1C biC , where ai1j (j = 1, . . . , C) are
random numbers known by the challenger.
According to Deﬁnition 2, the DPDP scheme is secure if, whenever the veriﬁ cation succeeds with non-
negligible probabilty (i.e., the adversary wins the data possession game), thechallenger can extract the actual
blocks (which we denote with mi1, mi2, . . . , miC ) in polynomially-many interactions with the adversary.
We extract the actual blocks by means of the “weighted” sums sent by the ad versary as follows. Suppose
the challenger challenges the adversary for a polynomial number of times an d gets C verifying responses.
Then if S1, S2, . . . , SC are the weigthed sums sent each time, we have the following equations:
S1 = ai11bi1 + ai12bi2 + . . . + ai1C biC
S2 = ai21bi1 + ai22bi2 + . . . + ai2C biC
...
SC = aiC1bi1 + aiC2bi2 + . . . + aiCC biC
where aij1, aij2, . . . , aijC for j = 1 , . . . , C are different sets of random numbers sent each time with the
challenge and bi1, bi2, . . . , biC are the blocks that the adversary claims to possess. By solving this system
of linear equations we extract the blocks bi1, bi2, . . . , biC. We recall that the actual blocks are denoted
with mi1, mi2, . . . , miC. Since all the responses veriﬁed we have that for all j = 1 , . . . , C the following
statements are true:
1. Tij = gmij mod N, whp. Otherwise the adversary can break the collision resistance of fun ction h
by Lemma 2;
2. T
aij1
i1 T
aij2
i2 . . . T
aijC
iC = gSj mod N, which by the linear system equations can be written as
T
aij1
i1 T
aij2
i2 . . . T
aijC
iC = (gbi1 )aij1 (gbi2 )aij2 . . .(gbiC )aijC mod N . (1)
Suppose now there is a subset of challenged blocks{b1, b2, . . . , bk} ⊆ { bi1, bi2, . . . , biC} such that bj ⁄= mj
for all j = 1 , . . . , k, i.e., we extract some blocks that are not the actual blocks. Let a1, a2, . . . , ak and
T1, T2, . . . , Tk be the random numbers and the tags respectively that correspond to some r esponse (i.e., to
some linear equation of the system) for blocks {b1, b2, . . . , bk}. Equation 1 can be written as
T a1
1 T a2
2 . . . Tak
k = (gb1)a1(gb2)a2 . . .(gbC )aC mod N , (2)
since for the remaining blocks bj = mj and Tj = gmj mod N is the correct tag with high probability, and
therefore the expressions referring to them are cancelled out. Now, for Equation 2 to be satisﬁed, we have
ga1m1+a2m2+...+akmk = ga1b1+a2b2+...+akbk mod N ,
14
while a1m1 + a2m2 + . . . + akmk ⁄= a1b1 + a2b2 + . . . + akbk. This means that the adversary can ﬁnd
A ⁄= B such that gA = gB mod N, which means that A − B = kφ(N ) and therefore A − B can be used
to factor N, by using Miller’s Lemma [19].
Therefore, the exracted blocks must be the correct ones. Otherwise, the adversary can either break the
collision resistance of the function used, or factor N. 2
Concerning the probability of detection, the client probes C blocks by calling the Challenge procedure.
Clearly, if the server tampers with a block other than those probed, the serv er will not be caught. Assume
now that the server tampers with t blocks. If the total number of blocks is n, the probability that at least one
of the probed blocks matches at least one of the tampered blocks is 1 − ((n − t)/n)C, since choosing C of
n − t non-tampered blocks has probability ((n − t)/n)C.
6 Rank-based RSA trees
We now describe how we can use ideas from [26] to implement the DPDP II sc heme (see Table 1), which
has a higher probability of detection, maintains logarithmic communication complexity b ut has increased
update time.
In [26], a dynamic authenticated data structure called RSA tree is presented that achieves constant ex-
pected query time (i.e., time to construct the proof), constant proof size, and O(nǫ log n) expected amortized
update time, for a given 0 < ǫ < 1. We can add rank information to the RSA tree by explicitly storing ranks
at the internal nodes. Using this data structure allows the server to answerO(log n) challenges with O(log n)
communication cost since the proof for a block tag has O(1) size.
The reason for sending additional challenges is the fact that the probability p of detection increases with
number C of challenges, since p = 1 − (1 − f )C, where f is the fraction of tampered blocks. Therefore,
by using an RSA tree with ranks to implement DPDP, we obtain the same complexity measures as DPDP I,
except for the update time, which increases fromO(log n) to O(nǫ log n) (expected amortized), and achieve
an improved probability of detection equal to 1 − (1 − f )Ω(log n).
We now describe how we can use the tree structure from [26] to support rank information. In [26], an
ǫ is chosen between 0 and 1 and a tree structure 2 is built that has O(1/ǫ) levels, each node having degree
O(nǫ). However, there is no notion of order in [26]. To introduce a notion of or der we assume that the
elements lie at the leaves of the tree and we view it as a B-tree with lower bound o n the degree t = 3 nǫ/4
and therefore upper bound equal to 2t = 3nǫ/2, which are both viewed as constants. Therefore we can use
known B-tree algorithms to do the updates with the difference that we rebuild the tree whenever the number
of the blocks of the ﬁle increases fromn to 2n or decreases from n to n/4. When we rebuild, we set the new
constants for the degree of the tree. By the properties of the B-tree (all le aves lie at the same level), we can
prove that it is not possible to change the number of the levels of the tree bef ore a new rebuilt takes place.
To see that, suppose our ﬁle initially consists of n blocks. Suppose now, for contradiction that the number
of the levels of the tree changes before a new rebuilt takes place. Note tha t a new rebuilt takes place when
at least 3n/4 operations (insertions/deletions) take place. We distinguish two cases:
1. If the number of the levels of the tree increases, that means that the numbe r b of the added blocks
is at least n1+ǫ − n. Since there is no rebuilt it should be the case that b ≤ 3n/4 and therefore that
n1+ǫ − n ≤ 3n/4, which is a contradiction for large n;
2. If the number of the levels of the tree decreases, that means that the numb er b of the deleted blocks
is at least n − n1−ǫ. Since there is no rebuilt it should be the case that b ≤ 3n/4, and therefore that
n − n1−ǫ ≤ 3n/4, which is again a contradiction for large n.
2The use of such a tree is dictated by the speciﬁc cryptographic primitive used.
15
Therefore before a big change happens in the tree, we can rebuild (by using the same ǫ and by changing
the node degree) the tree and amortize. This is important, because the RSA tre e structure works for trees
that do not change their depth during updates, since the constant proof complexity comes from the fact that
the depth is not a function of the elements in the structure (unlike B-trees), but is always maintained to be a
constant.
Using the above provably secure authenticated data structure based on [ 26] to secure the tags (where
security is based on the strong RSA assumption), we obtain the following result:
Theorem 3 Assume the strong RSA assumption and the factoring assumption hold. The d ynamic provable
data possession scheme presented in this section (DPDP II) has the followin g properties, where n is the
current number of blocks of the ﬁle, f is the fraction of tampered blocks, and ǫ is a given constant such that
0 < ǫ < 1:
1. The scheme is secure according to Deﬁnition 2;
2. The probability of detecting a tampered block is
1 − (1 − f )Ω(log n);
3. The update time is O(nǫ log n) (expected amortized) at the server and O(1) (expected) at the client;
4. The expected query time at the server, the expected veriﬁcation time at the client and the worst-case
communication complexity are each O(log n);
5. The client space is O(1) and the server space is O(n).
Note that sending O(log n) challenges in [2, 3] or DPDP I would increase the communication complex-
ity from O(1) to O(log n) and from O(log n) to O(log2 n), respectively.
7 Extensions and applications
Our DPDP scheme supports a variety of distributed data outsourcing applica tions where the data is subject
to dynamic updates. In this section, we describe extensions of our basic sc heme that employ additional
layers of rank-based authenticated dictionaries to store hierarchical, application-speciﬁc metadata for use in
networked storage and version control.
7.1 Variable-sized blocks
We now show how we can augment our hashing scheme to support variable -sized blocks (e.g., when we
want to update a byte of a certain block). Recall that our ranking scheme a ssigns each internal node u a
rank r(u) equivalent to the number of bottom-level nodes (data blocks) reachable fr om the subtree rooted
at u; these nodes (blocks) are conventionally assigned a rank equal to 1. We support variable-sized blocks
by deﬁning the rank of a node at the bottom level to be the size of its associate d block (i.e., in bytes). Each
internal node, in turn, is assigned a rank equivalent to the amount of byte s reachable from it. Queries and
proofs proceed the same as before, except that ranks and intervals a ssociated with the search path refer to
byte offsets, not block indices, with updates phrased as, e.g., “insert m bytes at byte offset i”. Such an
update would require changing only the block containing the data at byte inde x i. Similarly, modiﬁcations
and deletions affect only those blocks spanned by the range of bytes speciﬁed in the update.
16
7.2 Directory hierarchies
We can also extend our DPDP scheme for use in storage systems consisting of multiple ﬁles within a direc-
tory hierarchy. The key idea is to place the start node of each ﬁle’s rank-based authenticated structure (from
our single-ﬁle scheme) at the bottom node of a parent dictionary used to map ﬁle names to ﬁles. Using
key-based authenticated dictionaries [25], we can chain our proofs and update operations through the entire
directory hierarchy, where each directory is represented as an authe nticated dictionary storing its ﬁles and
subdirectories. Thus, we can use these authenticated dictionaries in a nes ted manner, with the start node of
the topmost dictionary representing the root of the ﬁle system(as depicted in Figure 2(a)).
This extension provides added ﬂexibility for multi-user environments. Consid er a system administrator
who employs an untrusted storage provider. The administrator can keep the authenticated structure’s meta-
data corresponding to the topmost directory, and use it to periodically chec k the integrity of the whole ﬁle
system. Each user can keep the label of the start node of the dictionary co rresponding to her home direc-
tory, and use it to independently check the integrity of her home ﬁle system at any time, without need for
cooperation from the administrator.
Since the start node of the authenticated structure of the directory hierarc hy is the bottom-level node
of another authenticated structure at a higher level in the hierarchy, upp er levels of the hierarchy must be
updated with each update to the lower levels. Still, the proof complexity stays rela tively low: For example,
for the rank-based authenticated skip list case, if n is the maximum number of leaves in each skip list and
the depth of the directory structure is d, then proofs on the whole ﬁle system have expected O(d log n) size
and computation time whp.
(a) A ﬁle system skip list with blocks as leaves, directo-
ries and ﬁles as roots of nested skip lists.
(b) A version control ﬁle system. Notice the additional
level of skiplists for holding versions of a ﬁle. To elim-
inate redundancy at the version level, persistent authen-
ticated skip lists could be used [1]: the complexity of
these proofs will then be O(log n + log v + d log f ).
Figure 2: Applications of our DPDP system.
7.3 Version control
We can build on our extensions further to efﬁciently support a versioning system (e.g., a CVS repository,
or versioning ﬁlesystem). Such a system can be supported by adding ano ther additional layer of key-based
authenticated dictionaries [25], keyed by revision number, between the dictionaries for each ﬁle’s directory
and its data, chaining proofs as in previous extensions. (See Figure 2(b ) for an illustration.) As before, the
17
client needs only to store the topmost basis; thus we can support a version ing system for a single ﬁle with
only O(1) storage at the client and O(log n + log v) proof complexity, where v is the number of the ﬁle
versions. For a versioning system spanning multiple directories, let v be the number of versions and d be
the depth of the directory hierarchy. The proof complexity for the version ing ﬁle system has expected size
O(d(log n + log v)).
The server may implement its method of block storage independently from the dic tionary structures
used to authenticate data; it does not need to physically duplicate each block of data that appears in each
new version. However, as described, this extension requires the additio n of a new rank-based dictionary
representing ﬁle data for each new revision added (since this dictionary is placed at the leaf of each ﬁle’s
version dictionary). In order to be more space-efﬁcient, we could usepersistent authenticated dictionaries [1]
along with our rank mechanism. These structures handle updates by adding some new nodes along the
update path, while preserving old internal nodes corresponding to prev ious versions of the structure, thus
avoiding unneeded replication of nodes.
8 Performance evaluation
We evaluate the performance of our DPDP I scheme (Section 4.2) in terms of c ommunication and compu-
tational overhead, in order to determine the price of dynamism over static PDP. For ease of comparison, our
evaluation uses the same scenario as in PDP [2], where a server wishes to prove possession of a 1GB ﬁle.
As observed in [2], detecting a 1% fraction of incorrect data with 99% conﬁdence requires challenging a
constant number of 460 blocks; we use the same number of challenges for comparison.
8.1 Proof size
The expected size of proofs of possession for a 1GB ﬁle under differ ent block sizes is illustrated in Fig-
ure 3(a). Here, a DPDP proof consists of responses to 460 authentica ted skip list queries, combined with a
single veriﬁcation block M = Σ aimi, which grows linearly with the block size. The size of this block M
is the same as that used by the PDP scheme in [2], 3 and is thus represented by the line labeled PDP. The
distance between this line and those for our DPDP I scheme represents our communication overhead—the
price of dynamism—which comes from the skip list query responses (illustrate d in Table 2). Each response
contains on average 1.5 log n rows, so the total size decreases exponentially (but slowly) with increasin g
block size, providing near-constant overhead except at very small block sizes.
8.2 Server computation
Next, we measure the computational overhead incurred by the server in an swering challenges. Figure 3(b)
presents the results of these experiments (averaged from 5 trials), whichwere performed on an AMD Athlon
X2 3800+ system with 2GHz CPU and 2GB of RAM. As above, we compute the time required by our
scheme for a 1GB ﬁle under varying block sizes, providing 99% conﬁden ce. As shown, our performance
is dominated by computing M and increases linearly with the block size; note that static PDP [2] must
also compute this M in response to the challenge. Thus the computational price of dynamism—time spe nt
traversing the skip list and building proofs—while logarithmic in the number of blo cks, is extremely low
in practice: even for a 1GB ﬁle with a million blocks of size 1KB, computing the pro of for 460 challenged
blocks (achieving 99% conﬁdence) requires less than 40ms in total (as sma ll as 13ms with larger blocks).
We found in other experiments that even when the server is not I/O bound ( i.e., when computing M from
3The authors present multiple versions of their scheme. The version witho ut the knowledge of exponent assumption and the
random oracle actually sends this M; other versions only compute it.
18
250
500
750
1000
1250
Proof size (KB)Proof size (KB)
200 400 600 800 1000
Block size (KB)Block size (KB)
DPDP I (99%)
PDP (99%)
(a)
0
200
400
600
Time to compute server proof (ms)Time to compute server proof (ms)
2 5 10 20 50 100 200
Block size (KB)Block size (KB)
Proof time: DPDP I (99%)
Proof time: PDP (99%)
(b)
Figure 3: (a) Size of proofs of possession on a 1GB ﬁle, for 99% prob ability of detecting misbehavior. (b)
Computation time required by the server in response to a challenge for a 1GB ﬁ le, with 99% probability of
detecting misbehavior.
memory) the computational cost was nearly the same. Note that any outsourced storage system proving the
knowledge of the challenged blocks must reach those blocks and therefo re pay the I/O cost, and therefore
such a small overhead for such a huge ﬁle is more than acceptable.
The experiments suggest the choice of block size that minimizes total communicatio n cost and compu-
tation overhead for a 1GB ﬁle: a block size of 16KB is best for 99% conﬁd ence, resulting in a proof size of
415KB, and computational overhead of 30ms. They also show that the price of dynamism is a small amount
of overhead compared to the existing PDP scheme.
8.3 Version control
Finally, we evaluate an application that suits our scheme’s ability to efﬁciently handle and prove updates to
versioned, hierarchical resources. Public CVS repositories offer a useful benchmark to assess the perfor-
mance of the version control system we describe in Section 7. Using CVS re positories for the Rsync [28],
Samba [28] and Tcl [24] projects, we retrieved the sequence of updates from the RCS source of each ﬁle in
each repository’s main branch. RCS updates come in two types: “insertm lines at line n” or “deletem lines
starting at line n”. Note that other partially-dynamic schemes (i.e., Scalable PDP [3]) cannot handle these
types of updates. For this evaluation, we consider a scenario where que ries and proofs descend a search
19
path through hierarchical authenticated dictionaries corresponding (in order) to the directory structure, his-
tory of versions for each ﬁle, and ﬁnally to the source-controlled lines of each ﬁle. We use variable-sized
data blocks, but for simplicity, assume a na ¨ıve scheme where each line of a ﬁle is assigned its own block;
a smarter block-allocation scheme that collects contiguous lines during update s would yield fewer blocks,
resulting in less overhead.
Rsync Samba Tcl
dates of activity 1996-2007 1996-2004 1998-2008
# of ﬁles 371 1538 1757
# of commits 11413 27534 24054
# of updates 159027 275254 367105
Total lines 238052 589829 1212729
Total KBytes 8331 KB 18525 KB 44585 KB
Avg. # updates/commit 13.9 10 15.3
Avg. # commits/ﬁle 30.7 17.9 13.7
Avg. # entries/directory 12.8 7 19.8
Proof size, 99% 425 KB 395 KB 426 KB
Proof size per commit 13 KB 9 KB 15 KB
Proof time per commit 1.2ms 0.9ms 1.3ms
Table 4: Authenticated CVS server characteristics.
Table 4 presents performance characteristics of three public CVS repositories under our scheme; while
we have not implemented an authenticated CVS system, we report the server overhead required for proofs of
possession for each repository. Here, “commits” refer to individual CVS checkins, each of which establish
a new version, adding a new leaf to the version dictionary for that ﬁle; “up dates” describe the number of
inserts or deletes required for each commit. Total statistics sum the number of lin es (blocks) and kilobytes
required to store all inserted lines across all versions, even after they h ave been removed from the ﬁle by
later deletions.
We use these ﬁgures to evaluate the performance of a proof of possess ion under the DPDP I scheme:
as described in Section 7, the cost of authenticating different versions o f ﬁles within a directory hierarchy
requires time and space complexity corresponding to the depth of the skip list h ierarchy, and the width of
each skip list encountered during the Prove procedure.
As in the previous evaluation, “Proof size, 99%” in Table 4 refers to the siz e of a response to 460
challenges over an entire repository (all directories, ﬁles, and version s). This ﬁgure shows that clients of
an untrusted CVS server—even those storing none of the versioned res ources locally—can query the server
to prove possession of the repository using just a small fraction (1% to 5%) of the bandwidth required to
download the entire repository. “Proof size and time per commit ” refer to a proof sent by the server to
prove that a single commit (made up of, on average, about a dozen update s) was performed successfully,
representing the typical use case. These commit proofs are very small (9 KB to 15KB) and fast to compute
(around 1ms), rendering them practical even though they are required for each commit. Our experiments
show that our DPDP scheme is efﬁcient and practical for use in distributed applications.
Acknowledgments
Work supported in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation under grants CNS–0627553, IIS–0713403
and OCI–0724806, by a research gift from NetApp, Inc., and by the C enter for Geometric Computing and
the Kanellakis Fellowship at Brown University. We thank Giuseppe Ateniese and Anna Lysyanskaya for
many useful discussions.
20
References
[1] A. Anagnostopoulos, M. Goodrich, and R. Tamassia. Persistent Au thenticated Dictionaries and Their
Applications. ISC, pages 379–393, 2001.
[2] G. Ateniese, R. Burns, R. Curtmola, J. Herring, L. Kissner, Z. Pete rson, and D. Song. Provable data
possession at untrusted stores. In ACM CCS, pages 598–609, 2007.
[3] G. Ateniese, R. D. Pietro, L. V . Mancini, and G. Tsudik. Scalable and efﬁcient provable data posses-
sion. SecureComm, 2008.
[4] M. Blum, W. Evans, P. Gemmell, S. Kannan, and M. Naor. Checking the C orrectness of Memories.
Algorithmica, 12(2):225–244, 1994.
[5] D. Boneh, B. Lynn, and H. Shacham. Short signatures from the we il pairing. In ASIACRYPT, 2001.
[6] D. E. Clarke, S. Devadas, M. van Dijk, B. Gassend, and G. E. Suh. Incremental multiset hash functions
and their application to memory integrity checking. In ASIACRYPT, pages 188–207, 2003.
[7] Y . Dodis, S. Vadhan, and D. Wichs. Proofs of retrievability via hardness ampliﬁcation. In TCC, 2009.
[8] C. Dwork, M. Naor, G. N. Rothblum, and V . Vaikuntanathan. How efﬁcient can memory checking be?,
2008. Manuscript.
[9] D. L. Gazzoni and P. S. L. M. Barreto. Demonstrating data possess ion and uncheatable data transfer.
Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2006/150, 2006.
[10] M. T. Goodrich, C. Papamanthou, R. Tamassia, and N. Triandopoulos. Athos: Efﬁcient authentication
of outsourced ﬁle systems. In ISC, pages 80–96, 2008.
[11] M. T. Goodrich, R. Tamassia, and A. Schwerin. Implementation of an a uthenticated dictionary with
skip lists and commutative hashing. In DISCEX II, pages 68–82, 2001.
[12] A. Juels and B. S. Kaliski. PORs: Proofs of retrievability for large ﬁ les. In ACM CCS, pages 584–597,
2007.
[13] M. Kallahalla, E. Riedel, R. Swaminathan, Q. Wang, and K. Fu. Plutus: Scalable secure ﬁle sharing
on untrusted storage. FAST, pages 29–42, 2003.
[14] J. Kubiatowicz, D. Bindel, Y . Chen, S. Czerwinski, P. Eaton, D. Ge els, R. Gummadi, S. Rhea,
H. Weatherspoon, W. Weimer, C. Wells, and B. Zhao. Oceanstore: an ar chitecture for global-scale
persistent storage. SIGPLAN Not., 35(11):190–201, 2000.
[15] F. Li, M. Hadjieleftheriou, G. Kollios, and L. Reyzin. Dynamic authentic ated index structures for
outsourced databases. In SIGMOD, pages 121–132, 2006.
[16] J. Li, M. Krohn, D. Mazieres, and D. Shasha. Secure Untrusted Data Repository (SUNDR). OSDI,
pages 121–136, 2004.
[17] U. Maheshwari, R. Vingralek, and W. Shapiro. How to build a trusted database system on untrusted
storage. In OSDI, pages 10–26, Berkeley, CA, USA, 2000. USENIX Association.
[18] R. Merkle. A digital signature based on a conventional encryption f unction. LNCS, 293:369–378,
1987.
21
[19] G. Miller. Riemann’s hypothesis and tests for primality. In STOC, pages 234–239, 1975.
[20] A. Muthitacharoen, R. Morris, T. Gil, and B. Chen. Ivy: A Read/Wr ite Peer-to-Peer File System.
OSDI, pages 31–44, 2002.
[21] M. Naor and K. Nissim. Certiﬁcate revocation and certiﬁcate update. I n USENIX Security, pages
17–17, 1998.
[22] M. Naor and G. N. Rothblum. The complexity of online memory checking. I n FOCS, pages 573–584,
2005.
[23] A. Oprea, M. Reiter, and K. Yang. Space-Efﬁcient Block Storag e Integrity. NDSS, 2005.
[24] J. Ousterhout. Tcl/tk. http://www.tcl.tk/.
[25] C. Papamanthou and R. Tamassia. Time and space efﬁcient algorithms f or two-party authenticated
data structures. In ICICS, pages 1–15, 2007.
[26] C. Papamanthou, R. Tamassia, and N. Triandopoulos. Authenticated hash tables. In ACM CCS, pages
437–448, 2008.
[27] W. Pugh. Skip lists: A probabilistic alternative to balanced trees. Commun. ACM, 33(6):668–676,
1990.
[28] Samba. Samba.org CVS repository. http://cvs.samba.org/cgi-bin/cvsweb/.
[29] T. Schwarz and E. Miller. Store, Forget, and Check: Using Algebr aic Signatures to Check Remotely
Administered Storage. ICDCS, page 12, 2006.
[30] F. Sebe, A. Martinez-Balleste, Y . Deswarte, J. Domingo-Ferre, a nd J.-J. Quisquater. Time-bounded
remote ﬁle integrity checking. Technical Report 04429, LAAS, July 2004.
[31] H. Shacham and B. Waters. Compact proofs of retrievability. In ASIACRYPT, 2008.
[32] R. Tamassia. Authenticated data structures. In ESA, pages 2–5, 2003.
[33] R. Tamassia and N. Triandopoulos. Computational bounds on hierar chical data processing with appli-
cations to information security. In ICALP, pages 153–165, 2005.
22