Proofs of Space: When Space is of the Essence
Giuseppe Ateniese1,2, Ilario Bonacina 1, Antonio Faonio1, and Nicola Galesi 1
1 Sapienza - University of Rome, Italy
{ateniese,bonacina,faonio,galesi}@di.uniroma1.it
2 Johns Hopkins University, USA
Abstract. Proofs of computational eﬀort were devised to control denial of service attacks. Dwork and
Naor (CRYPTO ’92), for example, proposed to use such proofs to discourage spam. The idea is to couple
each email message with a proof of work that demonstrates the sender performed some computational
task. A proof of work can be either CPU-bound or memory-bound. In a CPU-bound proof, the prover
must compute a CPU-intensive function that is easy to check by the veriﬁer. A memory-bound proof,
instead, forces the prover to access the main memory several times, eﬀectively replacing CPU cycles
with memory accesses.
In this paper we put forward a new concept dubbed proof of space . To compute such a proof, the
prover must use a speciﬁed amount of space, i.e., we are not interested in the number of accesses to
the main memory (as in memory-bound proof of work) but rather on the amount of actual memory
the prover must employ to compute the proof. We give a complete and detailed algorithmic description
of our model. We develop a comprehensive theoretical analysis which uses combinatorial tools from
Complexity Theory (such as pebbling games) which are essential in studying space lower bounds.
Keywords: Space Complexity, Proof of Work, Pebbling Game, Random Oracle Model.
1 Introduction
Space has a special meaning in Computer Science. It refers to the number of cells of the working tape used
by a Turing Machine (TM). While a TM computes a function, it will make several steps (relevant to time
complexity) and use a certain number of tape cells (relevant to space complexity).
In [14], Dwork and Naor proposed to employ proof of work (PoW) to discourage spam and, in general,
to hinder denial of service attacks. Before any action (such as sending an email), the prover must perform
some work and generate a proof of it that can be eﬃciently veriﬁed. Proofs of work are currently being
used to implement a publicly veriﬁable ledger for Bitcoin, where transactions are registered and veriﬁed by
a community of users to avoid the double-spending problem [28]. The work performed by the prover can be
CPU-bound, in which the work represents the number of steps made by a TM, or memory-bound, in which
the work represents the times a TM access the working tape. The motivation behind memory-bound PoW
is that, while CPU speed may diﬀer signiﬁcantly among distinct platforms, memory latencies vary much less
across machines and may prove to be more equitable and egalitarian. We stress that memory-bound function
complexity measures the number of memory accesses and does not take into account the actual amount of
memory employed. That is, a TM may read and mark a single cell several times to reach a certain complexity
level but it will still end up using only one cell.
In this work we deﬁne the notion of Proof of Space (PoSpace). PoSpace forces the prover to use at least a
speciﬁed amount of memory. This means, for instance, that a TM must now use a predetermined number of
distinct tape cells to be able to respond to a challenge. We will show that our PoSpace construction is also a
memory-bound PoW under the deﬁnition provided in [13, 15], while in general a PoW cannot be a PoSpace
under our deﬁnition. The state of the art memory-bound PoW was described in [15] by Dwork, Goldberg,
and Naor. Their scheme requires both the prover and the veriﬁer to store a large table T but they devised
ways to mitigate this problem via either hash trees or public-key signatures. We view PoSpace as a valid
alternative to various ﬂavors of PoWs. In PoSpace the spotlight is turned on the amount of space rather than
on CPU cycles or memory accesses as in PoWs. In addition, PoSpace solves certain problems where PoW is
not applicable. For instance, we believe PoSpace can be employed in forensic analysis or device attestation
to conﬁrm remotely that an embedded device has been successfully wiped. That is, a remote device could
be instructed to respond to a wipe command with PoSpace as evidence that its functional memory is now
overwritten (cf. [30]).
Straw Man Solutions. Memory-bound functions were ﬁrst introduced by Abadi et al. [1]. In the main con-
struction of memory-bound PoW given in [13], both the prover and the veriﬁer share a large random table
T . The prover must compute a function by making several memory accesses to uniformly random positions
in T . Through a proper tuning of the parameters, it is also possible to force the prover to reserve a speciﬁc
amount of memory. In another construction, the authors of [13] show that the veriﬁer does not have to store
T . The idea is to sign all pairs ( i,T [i]) and then challenge the prover on 𝓁 positions of T . The prover will
return the 𝓁 valuesT [i] along with an aggregate signature that can be checked by the veriﬁer to ensure the
prover is holding the table T .
We ﬁrst remark that it is possible to harness recent advances in proof of storage schemes, such as
Provable Data Possession (PDP) [4] and (compact) Proof of Retrievability (POR) [33], to reduce the message
complexity fromO(𝓁) to essentially constant. This solution improves upon the one in [13] and, as long as the
initialization phase is performed only once, would meet our eﬃciency requirements for PoSpace. However,
proof of storage does not satisfy our deﬁnition of PoSpace since the running time of the veriﬁer depends on
the size ofT . The only way to avoid linear dependency is to run a PDP-based scheme with spot checking [4],
but then the prover either must use more space than required or will not access all the memory locations.
Intuitively, the reason why a solution based on proof of storage will not work rests upon the interpretation
of what proof of space really means. Proof of storage applied to our context satisﬁes the notion that “the
prover can access space”. PoSpace instead captures the stronger notion that “the prover can handle space”,
i.e., the prover possesses, controls, and manipulates space directly. In particular, we distinguish between a
prover that can only read memory and a prover that can read and write memory. This is important because,
among other things, write operations cannot be parallelized within classical computer architectures. We will
provide a formal deﬁnition later and make this intuition rigorous.
We also remark that the adversarial model considered in [1,13] contemplates the existence of a small but
fast cache memory that must be saturated to force the prover to dispense with the cache and use traditional
RAM memory. Thus, the constructions in [1, 13, 15] do provide a form of proof of space where the space
coincides with the cache memory. But, as for proof-of-storage schemes, these schemes satisfy the weaker
notion of PoSpace where the prover can only read memory.
Other Related Work. A proof of work is also known as a cryptographic puzzle in the computer security
literature. Puzzles were devised to improve on the proposal by Back [6] and employed to thwart denial of
service attacks. In particular, it is important to make them hard to precompute (see [23] and references
therein). Waters et al. [36] suggest to outsource the creation of puzzles to an external secure entity. Abliz
and Tznati [2] introduce the concept of network-bound puzzles where clients collect tokens from remote
servers before querying the service provider. They argue that network latency provides a good solution to
the resource disparity problem.
All solutions above deal with proof of eﬀort and cannot be adapted to prove possession of space in the
way it is meant and deﬁned in this paper.
Litecoin (litecoin.org) is a variant of Bitcoin that employs scrypt [29] to certify a public ledger. scrypt
is deﬁned as a sequential memory-hard function and originally designed as a key derivation function, but it
is used as a proof of eﬀort in litecoin to hinder the use of specialized hardware. Technically, scrypt is not
a memory-bound function as deﬁned in [1] since no lower bound on the memory used by the function can
be guaranteed. Thus, it is not even a PoSpace. We also note it requires both the prover and the veriﬁer to
dedicate a possibly large amount of memory, while ideally only the prover should reserve and use actual
memory (as in our construction to be presented later).
Dziembowski et al. [19] have independently suggested a notion of proof of space. Their original construc-
tion generalizes the hash-based PoW of Cash [6] and does not employ the pebbling framework of [15] (cf.
Appendix A of [16]). A major overhaul version of their paper later appeared on the IACR Crypto Eprint
2
repository [16], along with ours [3]. Their new version does use pebbling and adopts techniques similar to
ours.
However, there are two main diﬀerences between our work and [16] that make their work quite compelling:
1. The deﬁnition of proof of space in [16] is stronger in that it allows a two-stage protocol. The ﬁrst stage
can be executed once while the second stage can potentially be executed many times after the ﬁrst.
There are several applications that would beneﬁt from this two-stage notion (see for example the Gmail
scenario described in [16]). At the same time, however, this stronger notion is achieved in a more idealized
model than the Random Oracle Model. To emphasize the diﬀerences between these two notions, we will
often refer to ours as a one-stage PoSpace.
2. In [16] the authors provide two main constructions. The one that can be compared with our work achieves
better pebbling complexity (N/(log(N) vs. N/(log(N)·k)). Namely, they are able to remove the extra
k (a security parameter) through a clever technique.
The pebbling framework introduced in [15] has been used successfully in many other contexts (see for
example [16–18, 24, 34]). Dziembowski et al. [17] built a leakage resilient key evolution scheme based on the
pebbling framework. Their model allows an internal memory-bounded adversary that can control the update
operation and leak bounded amounts of information. Smith and Zhang obtain a more eﬃcient scheme [34],
speciﬁcally, their update operation runs in time quasilinear in the key length, rather than quadratic. The
key-evolution scheme can be adapted to obtain a proof of space with eﬃcient communication complexity but
the space complexity of the veriﬁer would not satisfy the eﬃciency constraint of PoSpace.
In a recent paper [24], Karvelas and Kiayias provide two eﬃcient constructions for Proof of Secure Erasure
(PoSE) as introduced by Perito and Tsudik [30]. Informally, in PoSE the prover must convince a veriﬁer
that a certain amount of memory has been erased. Both schemes in [24] are ingenious and one of them uses
the pebbling framework. PoSE and PoSpace are closely related notions but have diﬀerent requirements as
stated in [24]. In addition, in PoSpace the prover must show that he can access (read/write) memory while
in PoSE, intuitively, there should be the extra and necessary requirement that the memory contents before
and after the protocol execution are uncorrelated.
General ideas behind our protocol. We cast PoSpace in the context of delegation of computation, where
a delegator outsources to a worker the computation of a function on a certain input. Securely delegating
computation is a very active area [10, 11, 20, 22] thanks also to the popularity of cloud computing where
weak devices use the cloud to compute heavy functions. In the case of PoSpace, a function f is ﬁrst selected
satisfying the property that there exists a space lower bound for any TM computing it. Then, the veriﬁer
chooses a random input x and delegates to the prover the computation of f(x).
Speciﬁcally, we will turn to the class of functions derived from the“graph labeling problem” already used in
cryptography (see for example [15,17,18]). Important tools in delegation of computation are interactive proof
(and argument) systems. The delegation problem, as described in [27], can be solved as follows: The worker
computes y := f(x) and proves using an interactive proof system that indeed y = f(x). While interactive
proofs with statistical soundness and non-trivial savings in veriﬁcation time are unlikely to exist [8, 9, 21],
Kilian showed [25] that proof systems for NP languages with only computational soundness (i.e., argument
systems [7]) and succinctness 3 do exist. The construction in [25] relies on Merkle Trees and PCP proofs.
However, in the context of PoSpace, the PCP machinery is an overkill. In fact, the prover does not have to
prove the statement f(x) = y, but only that a space-consuming computation was carried out. Therefore,
we replace the PCP veriﬁcation with an ad-hoc scheme that results in a very eﬃcient overall construction
(while PCP-based constructions are notoriously impractical).
Our Contributions. We introduce a formal deﬁnition of Proof of Space ( PoSpace Deﬁnition 2) capturing
the intuitive idea of proving to be able to handle (read / write) at least a speciﬁed amount of space. We
provide two PoSpace protocols in the ROM. In addition, we provide a weaker form of PoSpace (wPoSpace)
3 I.e., the total amount of communication and the veriﬁcation time are both less than their respective values required
to transmit and check the NP-witness.
3
and prove that it is indeed a separate notion. Most of previous work on proof of storage [4, 5, 33] and on
memory-bound PoW, as deﬁned in [1, 13, 15], can somehow be adapted to meet this weaker deﬁnition but
we will not elaborate on this any further in this paper.
Structure of the paper. Section 2 contains some preliminary deﬁnitions. Section 3 contains the formal deﬁ-
nition of PoSpace and provide two PoSpace protocols. Section 5 contains the deﬁnition of a weak variant of
PoSpace that captures read-only provers and a separation result between PoSpace and this weaker variant.
Open Problems. It is not clear whether in general PoSpace implies the standard deﬁnition of PoW in the
sense of [14] (i.e., whether PoSpace is also a PoW). The main obstacle to proving a positive result consists in
showing non-amortizability. Roughly speaking, non-amortizability means that the “price” of computing the
function for l diﬀerent inputs is comparable to l times the “price” of computing the same function once. In
the context of PoWs, the “price” is measured in terms of computational time. A PoSpace prover for space
S requires a computational time proportional to S, thus we would like to reduce an adversary for l diﬀerent
protocol executions to an adversary for a single execution which spends less than S computational time.
The point is that in order to carry out l executions, the prover needs S space and we need to ensure that
he spends l×S computational time. But space is reusable and it may well happen that something already
computed for one instance is reused to compute the proof for another instance. Nevertheless, our second
construction does satisfy the deﬁnition of PoW. This is simply because we resort to the Random Oracle to
ensure that two instances of the protocol are uncorrelated.
2 Notations and Preliminary Deﬁnitions
Graph Notation. Given a directed acyclic graph (DAG) G, the set of successors and predecessors of v in G
are respectively Γ +(v) and Γ−(v). We will implicitly assume a topological ordering on its vertex set and a
boolean encoding of the vertices respecting that ordering. If Γ +(v) =∅ then v is an output-node and T(G)
is the set of all output-nodes of G. Analogously if Γ−(v) =∅ then v is an input-node and S(G) is the set of
all input-nodes of G.
Sampling, Interactive Execution, and Space. LetA be a probabilistic TM. We write y←A (x) to denote y
sampled from the output of A on input x. Moreover, given σ∈{ 0, 1}∗, we write y :=A(x;σ) to denote the
output ofA on inputx ﬁxing the random coins to beσ. We write ppt for the class of probabilistic polynomial
time algorithms. LetA,B be two probabilistic interactive TMs. An interactive joint execution betweenA,B
on common input x is speciﬁed via the next message function notation: let b1←B (x),ai←A (x,b 1,...,b i),
andbi+1←B (x,a 1,...,a i), then⟨A,B⟩ (x) denotes a joint execution ofA andB on common input x. If the
sequence of messages exchanged is ( b1,a 1,...,b k,ak,bk+1) we say that k is the number of rounds of that
joint execution and we denote with ⟨A,B⟩ (x) = bk+1 the last output of B in that joint execution of A and
B on common input x.
With Space(A,x ), we denote the maximal amount of space used by the deterministic TM A on input x
without taking into account the length of the input and output. More formally, we say that A(x) has space
s (or Space(A,x ) = s) if and only if at most s locations on A’s work tapes (excluding the input and the
output tapes) are ever written by A’s head during its computation on x. In the case of probabilistic TM A,
the function Space(A,x ) is a random variable that depends on A’s randomness.
Similarly, given two interactive TMs A andB, we can deﬁne the space occupied by A during a joint
execution on common input x as follows. Let ( b1,a 1,...,b k,ak,bk+1) the sequence of messages exchanged
during⟨A,B⟩ (x), then:
SpaceA(⟨A,B⟩,x ) := max
i=1,...,n
{Space (A,x,b 1,...,b i))}
As before, if A andB are probabilistic interactive TM then the function Space A(⟨A,B⟩,x ) is a random
variable that depends on the randomness of both A andB. For simplicity, when the inputs ofA (or⟨A,B⟩)
are clear from the context, we write Space(A) (or SpaceA (⟨A,B⟩)).
4
Merkle Trees. Merkle Trees ( MT) are classical tools in cryptography. A MT enables a party to succinctly
commit itself to a string l = (l1,...,l n) with li∈{ 0, 1}k.
The term “succinctly” here means that the MT-commitment has sizek which is independent with respect
to the size ofl. In a later stage, when a party opens the MT-commitment, it is guaranteed that the “opening”
can yield only the string l committed before (the binding property). Moreover l can be succinctly opened
location-by-location: the party can open li for any i giving the certiﬁcate attesting the value of li. Here we
use the term succinctly to mean that the “ opening”, i.e., the certiﬁcate, has size log n×k (sub-linear in n)
with respect to the size of l.
Abstractly, we deﬁne a Merkle Tree as a tuple of three algorithms ( GenCRH , MT, Open) where the ﬁrst
algorithm is a key generation algorithm for a collision resistance hash (CRH) function. Suppose that GenCRH
outputs a key s. Then MT takes as input s and a sequence of strings l and outputs the commitment C for
l, i.e., C = MTs(l). The algorithm Open takes as input the key s, a sequence of strings l, and an index i (it
is denoted as Opens(l,i )), and outputs the string li inl.
Usually, the term “commitment” refers to a scheme that is both hiding (i.e., the receiver cannot infer
any knowledge on l from the commitment) and binding. The MT scheme that we use does not provide the
hiding property but we still refer to it as a commitment.
A full description of the Merkle Tree is deferred to Appendix B.
Pebbling Games with wildcards. The following deﬁnition of pebbling game with wildcards is a modiﬁcation of
the standard deﬁnition of pebbling game that can be found, for instance, in [26]. Given a DAG G = (V,E ),
we say that a sequenceP = (P0,...,P T ) of subsets of V is a pebbling sequence on G with m wildcards if and
only if P0 =∅ and there exists a set W⊆V of size m such that, for each i∈{ 1,...,T }, exactly one of the
following holds:
– Pi =Pi−1∪{v} if Γ−(v)⊆Pi−1∪W (pebbling) or
– Pi⊆Pi−1 (unpebbling).
If a set of vertexes Γ is such that Γ ⊆⋃T
i=0Pi, we say that P pebbles Γ. IfP pebbles T(G) then we
say that P is a pebbling game on G with m wildcards. Moreover we say that the pebbling time ofP is T
and the pebbling space ofP is maxi|Pi|. Intuitively, a pebbled node is a node for which we have made some
computations. Instead, W represents complementary nodes, for which we have made no computations.
One of the main ingredients for the correctness of our constructions is the Pebbling Theorem [26] that
proves that stacks of superconcentrators graphs (Pippenger [31]) have an exponential pebbling space-time
trade oﬀ.
Theorem 1 (Pebbling Theorem). There exists a family of eﬃciently sampleable directed acyclic graphs
{GN,k}k,N∈N with constant fan-in d,N input nodes, N output nodes and kN logN nodes in total, such that:
1. Any pebbling sequence that pebbles ∆ output nodes has pebbling space at most S pebbles and m wildcards,
where|∆|> 4S + 2m + 1, and pebbling time T such that
T>|∆|
(N− 2S−m
2S +m + 1
)k
.
2. There exists a pebbling sequence that pebbles the graph GN,k which has pebbling space N + 2 and needs
time O(kN logN).
3. For any node v∈V (GN,k), the incoming nodes ofv and the position ofv in ﬁrst lexicographic topologically
order of GN,k are computable in O(k logN).
More details about the construction and the proof of this theorem are given in Appendix A.
5
Graph Labeling Problem with faults. We adopt the paradigm where the action of pebbling a node in a DAG
G is made equivalent to the action of having calculated some labeling on it. This paradigm was introduced
in [15] and also recently used in [17,18]. We make use of a Random Oracle (RO) H to build a labeling on G
according to the pebbling rules.
Deﬁnition 1 (H-labeling with faults). Given a DAG G with a ﬁxed ordering of the nodes and a Random
Oracle functionH :{0, 1}∗→{ 0, 1}k, we say that 𝓁 :V (G)→{ 0, 1}k is a (partial)H-labeling of G with m
faults if and only if there exists a set M⊆V (G) of size m such that for each v∈V (G)\M
𝓁(v) :=H(v‖𝓁(v1)‖... ‖𝓁(vd)) where{v1,...,v d} =Γ−(v). (1)
Given a label 𝓁 and a node v, we say that 𝓁 well-label v if only if the equation (1) holds for 𝓁 and v.
Our framework generalize the paradigm of [15] by introducing the concept of “faults”. As it is shown in
Section 3.1, dealing with “faults” is necessary because an adversary challenged on a labeling function could
cheat by providing an inconsistent label on some nodes (which, indeed, are then referred to as “faults”).
The use of a Random OracleH provides two important beneﬁts to our construction: First, the incompress-
ibility of any output given the input and the evaluation of the function in many diﬀerent points. Speciﬁcally,
for any x and x1,...,x m, the value of H(x) is uniformly random and independent of H(x1),..., H(xm).
Therefore, to storeH(x), an adversary needs space equal to the minimum between the shortest description
of the input and the length of the output. In particular, notice that we do not require that theentire function
be incompressible (this holds for a Random Oracle but it is trivially false for any real-world instantiation of
it). Second, in order to H-label the graph, any TM must follow a pebble strategy. In particular, to label a
node v, a TM must necessarily calculate and store the label values of all the predecessors 𝓁(v1),...,𝓁 (vd) of
the node v. If the graph G needs at least S pebbles to be pebbled eﬃciently in a pebbling game, then a TM
needs to store at least S labels (i.e., RO outputs) to compute an H-labeling of G. This general strategy is
proven sound in [15] and referred to as the Labeling Lemma. In our context, however, we provide m degrees
of freedom and, given a partialH-labeling 𝓁 ofG withm faults and aH-labeling 𝓁′ ofG, it will likely be the
case that 𝓁(v)⁄= 𝓁′(v) for each node v that is a descendant of a not well-labeled node. For this reason, we
must state a more general version of the Labeling Lemma in [15].
Lemma 1 (Labeling with Faults Lemma). Consider a DAG G with degree d, a TM A with advice
h, and a Random Oracle H :{0, 1}∗→{ 0, 1}k that computes an H-labeling 𝓁 with m faults of G. If h is
independent ofH, with overwhelming probability, there exists a pebbling sequence P = (P1,...,P T ) for the
DAGG with m wildcards having pebbling space S such that:
– S⩽ 1
k Space(A) +d,
– T⩽ (d + 2)σ, where σ is the number of queries of A toH.
In particular T is a lower bound for the execution time of A.
Before proceeding with the proof of the Lemma, we recall the deﬁnitions of min-entropy and conditional
average min-entropy as stated in [12]. For any random variable X we deﬁne the min-entropy of X as
H∞(X) :=− log
(
max
B TM
Pr [B() =X]
)
and we deﬁne the conditional average min-entropy of X given another random variable Y as
~H∞ (Y|X) :=− log
(
max
B TM
Pr [B(X) =Y ]
)
.
The following chaining rule for conditional average min-entropy holds [12]:
~H∞ (Y|X)> H∞ (Y )−|X|.
6
Proof. Let W be the set of not well-labeled nodes by the partial labeling 𝓁, in particular|W| =m. We look
at the ordered set of queries Q ={Q1,...,Q τ} ofA toH of the form Qi :=
(
wi‖𝓁(w1
i )‖... ‖𝓁(wd
i )
)
, where
∀i wi∈V (G) and∀j wj
i∈Γ−(wi). Notice that by costruction τ⩽σ.
LetSi =Si−1∪{wi}∪Γ−(wi). As𝓁 is a partialH-labeling andH a RO, we have that with overwhelming
probabilityΓ−(wi)⊆Si−1∪W∪ S(G). Hence, the sequence (S1,...,S σ) can be interpolated to a pebbling
sequence adding source vertexes when needed. This would make a pebbling sequence ˜P of length at most
(d + 1)τ. By interpolating ˜P with suitable unpebbling moves after each Si (i.e., removing all unnecessary
pebbles following the informal rule “unpebble as soon as possible”), we can obtain a pebbling sequence P
using minimal space. This is the desired pebbling sequenceP = (P1,...,P T ) withW as the set of wildcards.
Notice that by construction T = (d + 2)τ⩽ (d + 2)σ, hence we have only to focus on bounding the pebbling
space ofP.
Let ˜S = Space(A). Suppose for simplicity that k divides ˜S and, by contradiction, suppose that there
are ˜S/k +d + 1 pebbles at some time t∗ inP. This time t∗ should correspond to the time a query to
H is made. After the unpebble operation, by the rule “unpebble as soon as possible”, there are left at
least ˜S/k + 1 pebbles at time t∗ + 1. We look now at the labels of the nodes of G having at time t∗ + 1
one of the ˜S/k + 1 pebbles: by the use of a RO H, their labels correspond to a uniformly random string
L :=𝓁1‖... ‖𝓁 ˜S/k+1∈{ 0, 1} ˜S+k.
LetM be the content of the memory ofA at time t∗ + 1. Note thatM is a random variable in{0, 1} ˜S−1.
By the chaining rule of the conditional average min-entropy, we have that
~H∞ (L|M,h ) = ~H∞ (L|M)> H∞ (L)−S =k, (2)
where the ﬁrst equality comes from the independence of H from h.
We want to upperbound ~H∞ (L|M,h ). To do this we deﬁneB a TM that on input M and h executesA
from the state where she was at time t∗ + 1.B writes the string M inA’s working tape and the hint h inA’s
input tape. In addition, B simulates the random oracle H. Notice that, as we unpebble as soon as possible
then, for any 1⩽i⩽S/k + 1, the following cases occur:
1. A is going to query (as substring of queries to H) the value 𝓁i with overwhelming probability. In fact, if
this is not the case then it would be already deleted in P 4. The overwhelming probability comes from
the fact thatA could simply guess 𝓁i. HenceB can collect all of those labels 𝓁1,...,𝓁 ˜S/k+1 by looking at
the queries made byA toH. Moreover,B can reply to all the queries toH by uniformly choosing strings
in{0, 1}k and storing those values to reply accordingly in the future. This simulation is possible as h is
independent fromH.
2. A will not query H with a string which corresponds to a successor of 𝓁i before having queried 𝓁i toH
with overwhelming probability. Otherwise it would have already been deleted in P. The overwhelming
probability comes from the fact that there could be a collision in the RO H. Hence the simulation
ofH stores the labels 𝓁1,...,𝓁 ˜S/k+1 before using them as replies to A. Therefore the simulation is
indistinguishable fromA’s point of view. Eventually B outputs all the labels collected.
The existence ofB implies that− log(1−ν(k))> ~H∞ (L|M,h ), whereν(k) is a negligible function. This
gives an immediate contradiction with equation (2). Hence the pebbling space of P is at most ˜S/k +d. ⊓ ⊔
3 Proof-of-Space Protocols
In this section we deﬁne the notion of PoSpace, then we provide two constructions that meet the deﬁnition.
We later deﬁne a second notion of a weak form of PoSpace and show a separation result between the two
notions. In our deﬁnition below, we allow the adversary to access extra information to model the case in
which the adversary may outsource storage and computation to an external provider.
4 This is the reason why we apply this information-theoretical argument to time t∗ + 1 and not to time t∗. In fact
it would be the case that at time t∗ we are pebbling a vertex w but none of the vertexes in Γ−(w) would be used
again.
7
We model the write permission on the storage by providing a precomputation phase to the adversary.
That is, the adversary can use as much space as needed to produce an hint. The hint, that may depend
on the public parameters of PoSpace, can be read during the interactive phase (i.e., when the protocol is
started). In contrast, wPoSpace does not provide the adversary with a precomputation phase.
Deﬁnition 2 ( PoSpace). Consider Σ = (Gen, P, V), where Gen is a ppt TM, and P,V are interactive ppt
TMs. Let k∈ N be a security parameter. Suppose that the following points hold :
(Completeness) For all pk∈ Gen(1k) and for all S∈ N,S >k it holds⟨P, V⟩ (pk, 1S) = 1, time complexity
of P is O(poly(k,S ));
(Succinctness) For all S∈ N, S > kthe time and space complexity of V and the message complexity of
⟨P, V⟩, as functions of k and S, are O(poly(k)· poly logS);
(Soundness) For any ppt adversaryA and for any ppt TM with advice A′ such that pk← Gen(1k) and
h←A′(pk, 1S), the following event:
SndA,A′
Σ,S (k) :=⟨A(h), V⟩ (pk, 1S) = 1 ∧ SpaceA(⟨A(h), V⟩, pk, 1S)<S
has negligible probability (as a function of k) for all S∈ N, S >k.
Then, we say that Σ = (Gen, P, V) is a (one-stage) Proof of Space ( PoSpace). To be concise, we could say
informally that A wins when the event ∃S∈ N : SndA,A′
Σ,S (k) occurs.
Notice that in the completeness part we set just a very mild upper bound on the space complexity of
P. This is done on purpose to allow comparison among diﬀerent PoSpace protocols. In particular a useful
measure on a PoSpace protocol (Gen, P, V) is the following space gap: the ratio Space( P(pk, 1S))/S.
Notice that A′ is a space-unbounded ppt TM that models the fact that there might be information
that can be eﬃciently computed that the space-bounded adversary A can exploit somehow to compromise
PoSpace.
It is easy to see that the PoSpace deﬁnition implicitly provides sequential composability. In fact, the
adversaryA′ gives toA a hint which is a function of the public key, therefore the adversaryA′ can compute
all the previous executions of the protocol “in his head”.
We provide next a 4-messages PoSpace protocol in the Random Oracle Model (ROM) without any
computational assumption. By applying the Fiat-Shamir paradigm to the scheme, we obtain a 2-message
non-interactive PoSpace.
3.1 A 4-message PoSpace protocol
The protocol Σ4 = (Gen, V, P) is described in Figure 3.1 and it is a 4-message protocol.
The protocol follows in some way Kilian’s construction of argument systems [25]. For any string α∈
{0, 1}∗, let Hα(·) be deﬁned as H(α‖·). The veriﬁer chooses a random α and asks the prover to build a
Hα-labeling of graph GN,k, whereN depends on S. The purpose of α is to “reset” the Random Oracle. That
is, any previous information about H is now useless with overwhelming probability. The labeling provides
evidence that the prover has handled at least S memory cells. The prover then commits the labeling and
sends the commitment to the veriﬁer. At this point, the veriﬁer asks the prover to open several random
locations in the commitment and then it checks locally the integrity of the labeling. For a commitment C
and for any node that the veriﬁer has challenged, the prover sends what we call a C-proof for the node
(deﬁned next).
Deﬁnition 3 (C-proof). Given a DAG G, a commitment C, and a Random OracleH, we say that a string
π = (π0,...,π d) is a C-proof for a vertex v∈ V (G) w.r.t. H if only if given Γ−
G (v) = {w1,...,w d} the
following points hold:
1. π0 is a C-opening for v, let x be the value π0 is opening to;
2. for each i = 1,...,d , πi is a C-opening for wi, let xi be the value πi is opening to;
8
Generator Gen takes as input 1k and outputs pk := ({GN,k}N∈N,H,s ),
where{GN,k}N∈N is a family of graphs satisfying the Pebbling Theorem (Theorem 1), equipped with the natural
lexicographic topological ordering on its vertex set,
H is a RO and s is a key for CRH H.
Common input: k,S, pk
N :=⌈4γ(d +S/k) +γ⌉, where d is the degree of GN,k and γ∈ R, γ >1.
Veriﬁer V Prover P
1. Pick α←{ 0, 1}k α
C
Let 𝓁 be aHα-labeling of GN,k,
whereHα(·) :=H(α‖·).
Commit C := MTs(𝓁).
2. Pick (v1,...,v l) ← Vl
uniformly at random, where
l =⌊k ln2k logN⌋ and
V =V (GN,k)
3. Check for any i⩽ l if
Πi is a C-proof for vi wrt
theHα-labeling 𝓁
(v1,...,v l)
(Π1,...,Π l)
For anyvi, πi := Opens (𝓁,vi):
For anyvj
i∈Γ−(vi):
πj
i := Opens
(
𝓁,vj
i
)
Πi :=
(
πi,π 1
i,...,π d
i
)
Send (Π1,...,Π l)
Fig. 3.1. The 4-message PoSpace protocol Σ4.
3. x =H(v‖x1‖... ‖xd).
We omit C, G, andH, when they are clear from the context, by saying that π is simply a proof.
In the deﬁnition of C-proof, the points 1 and 2 refer to the commitment C while point 3 ensures the
integrity of the labeling. Note that the size of π is O(kd logN).
We remark that when TMB takes as input a ROH, it is intended thatB has oracle access toH and the
length of the input of B does not take into account the (exponentially long) length of H.
Theorem 2. The protocolΣ4 in Figure 3.1 is a (one-stage) PoSpace.
We start by giving the intuition behind the proof of the Theorem. Completeness is trivial. Succinctness
follows easily from point (3) of the Pebbling Theorem (Theorem 1). For Soundness, we ﬁrst prove that the
protocol Σ4 is a Proof-of-Knowledge (PoK) of a partial labeling with “few” faults. By the PoK property, we
can extract from a winning adversary a partial labeling with few faults. Thus, with overwhelming probability,
the adversaryA computes a partial labeling. We then exploit the binding property of the Merkle-Tree and
show that the adversary has computed the labeling during the round (1) of the protocol. By appropriately
ﬁxing the randomness of the protocol, we ensure that the hint h is independent of H, thus meeting all the
hypotheses of the Labeling Lemma (Lemma 1). We obtain then a pebbling strategy that has pebbling space
and pebbling time roughly upper-bounded by the respective space and time complexity of the adversary A.
Since the adversary uses strictly less space than S andA is ppt then, by our choice of the parameters, there
is a contradiction with the point (1) of the Pebbling Theorem (Theorem 1).
9
Proof. We focus on the Soundness. We divide the proof in two parts. First, in the PoK Lemma, we prove
that the Protocol Σ4 is a PoK for a partial labeling with “few” faults, and that the partial labeling has been
computed during the round (1), i.e., after the veriﬁer V sent the message α and before the adversary sent
the commitment message C. Then we combine the PoK Lemma with the Labeling Lemma and the Pebbling
Theorem to reach a contradiction assuming that there exists a winning ppt adversary.
We stress that the knowledge extractor doesn’t need to be eﬃcient since we do not rely on any compu-
tational assumption.
Lemma 2 (PoK Lemma). Consider the protocol Σ4 = ( Gen, V, P), a ppt adversaryA, a ppt Turing
Machine with advice A′, a space parameter S, and a security parameter k. Sample a random pk← Gen(1k)
and let h←A′(pk, 1S). If Pr
[
SndA,A′
Σ4,S(k)
]
is noticeable (where the probability is taken over the randomness
of pk,h and all the randomness used during the protocol execution between A and the veriﬁer) then, for
a noticeable probability over the choice of pk, there exist a ﬁrst veriﬁer message ˜α and an adversary’s
randomness ˜ρ such thatA(h) calculates anH ˜α-labeling𝓁 ofGN,k withm faults such that the following holds:
– the hint h is independent of H ˜α,
– m =O
( N
lnk
)
and
– for any well-labeled node u in 𝓁 we have (˜α‖u‖𝓁(u1)‖... ‖𝓁(ud))∈Q ,
whereQ is the set of queries to H made byA when fed with randomness ˜ρ during round (1) of the protocol
Σ4, and{u1,...,u d} =Γ−(u).
Proof. Consider the event
Q′ :={α∈{ 0, 1}k|A′(pk, 1S) made at least a query to H with preﬁx α}.
We say that a ﬁrst message α is good iﬀ
Pr
[
⟨A(h), V⟩ (pk, 1S) = 1| V sends α as ﬁrst message
]
is noticeable. By Markov’s inequality, the probability that “a uniformly random ﬁrst message α is good” is
noticeable. On the other hand, the probability that a uniformly random ﬁrst message α is inQ′ is bounded
by poly(k,S )/2k. Thus, there exists ˜α that is both good and not in Q′. Since ˜α⁄∈Q′ then h←A′(pk, 1S) is
independent ofH ˜α. Let V =V (GN,k) be the vertex set of GN,k and let WC(v) be the following event:
“A(h, pk, ˜α) sends the commitment C at the end of round (1)
and makes the veriﬁer V accept
when challenged with the vector v∈Vl during round (2)”.
The event WC(v) depends on the public key pk,A’s randomness, and the challenge v←Vl, where l is the
length of the message as deﬁned in the protocol Σ4.
A commitment string sent byA(h, pk, ˜α) to the veriﬁer V at the end of round (1) is a good commitment
iﬀ Pr[WC(v)] is noticeable. We have that with noticeable probability A(h, pk, ˜α) sends a good commitment
at the end of round (1).
It might be the case that A(h, pk, ˜α), instead of computing the labeling through the RO queries, simply
guesses the correct one. However, A’s guess is correct with probability at most 2 −k. Hence, with noticeable
probability during round (1):
–A(h) is not making any guesses and
–A(h) sends a good commitment.
Thus, there exists a randomness ˜ρ such thatA(h, pk, ˜α) satisﬁes the two properties above when fed with
˜ρ. To simplify the notation, we call such an adversary ˜A.
10
Thus, there exists a deterministic adversary ˜A that, with noticeable probability over pk and over the
challengev, makes the veriﬁer accept. Let C be the good commitment sent by ˜A. Now we focus on round
(2). Let
E :=
{
u∈V | Pr
pk,v
[ ˜A challenged onv∈Vl
sends a C-proof for u ∧ u∈v
]
<r (k)
}
,
where r(k)∈ poly(k).
There exists a procedure to compute the set E (recall that the extraction process doesn’t need to be
eﬃcient). Notice that by construction the nodes of V \E can be C-opened with noticeable probability,
hence they C-open to ﬁxed labels with noticeable probability (otherwise an eﬃcient sampling procedure can
invalidate the binding property of the underlying Merkle-Tree).
For eachu∈V\E, there exists a randomness ρu such that ˜A sends to the veriﬁer V aC-proof for u that
C-opens u to the most probable label. Here, it is assumed that A(h) is using ρu as source of randomness
during round (2).
If we collect all those values, we obtain an H ˜α-labeling with at most |E| faults.
We now prove the second item of the lemma, i.e., the upper-bound for m =|E|. Notice that m is a
random variable that depends on pk. For any ˜pk let ˜m :=m( ˜pk), the following chain of inequalities hold:
Pr
v
[
WC(v)| pk = ˜pk
]
= Pr
v
[
WC(v)∧∀vi∈v vi⁄∈E| pk = ˜pk
]
+
+ Pr
v
[
WC(v)∧∃vi∈v vi∈E| pk = ˜pk
]
⩽ Pr
v
[
∀vi∈v vi⁄∈E| pk = ˜pk
]
+
∑
u∈E
Pr
v
[
WC(v)∧u∈v| pk = ˜pk
]
⩽
(
1− ˜m
|V|
)l
+
∑
u∈E
Pr
v
[ ˜A challenged onv∈Vl
sends a C-proof for u ∧ u∈v
⏐⏐⏐⏐ pk = ˜pk
]
⩽ e− ˜m
|V |·l +
∑
u∈E
Pr
v
[ ˜A challenged onv∈Vl
sends a C-proof for u ∧ u∈v
⏐⏐⏐⏐ pk = ˜pk
]
Taking the expected value over pk, we obtain:
Pr
pk,v
[WC(v)]⩽ E
pk
[
e− m
|V |·l
]
+
∑
u∈E
Pr
pk,v
[ ˜A challenged onv∈Vl
sends a C-proof for u ∧ u∈v
]
< E
pk
[
e− m
|V |·l
]
+|V|r(k).
There exists a constant c∈ N such that, for k > >1, Pr [WC(v)]> k−c. Hence, if we select r(k) =
(|V|2kc)−1, we obtain that
E
pk
[
e− m
|V |·l
]
> 1
2kc.
Via the Paley-Zygmund inequality [32], we have:
Pr
pk
[
e− m
|V |·l > 1
4kc
]
> 1
8k2c.
Thus, with noticeable probability over pk:
m
|V|·l< ln 4 +c lnk.
11
Notice that, in the graph family {GN,k},|V| = kN logN. Thus, since l = k ln2k logN, we achieve the
required upper-bound for m.
We now prove the third item of the Lemma, i.e., for any assignment ρ of the randomness of A for the
round (1) such that (a) the commitment C is a good commitment and (b) A has not made any guess, we
have that for any u∈V\E,Qu := (˜α‖u‖𝓁(u1)‖... ‖𝓁(ud))∈Q , whereQ is the set of queries made by A to
H until the end of round (1) and {u1,...,u d} =Γ−(u).
If that would not be the case, we can deﬁne a reduction that violate the binding property of the Merkle
Tree. The probability that a uniformly random assignment of the randomness of A has the properties (a)
and (b) and a uniformly random ﬁrst message of V is good and not in Q′ is noticeable. Let p(k)∈ poly(k)
be a lower-bound for that probability.
By contradiction suppose there exists a u such that the query Qu⁄∈Q . By the choice of ˜α, Qu⁄∈Q ′
hence it must have be made in the round (2) of the protocol.
Suppose for now that the reduction knows the values 𝓁(u1),...,𝓁 (ud), then:
(a) it can choose an assignment of the randomness ρ ofA for the round (1) and a ﬁrst message α∈{ 0, 1}k
both uniformly at random. Then, it executes A(h, pk, 1S,α ;ρ) to obtain a commitment C;
(b) V challengesA in round (2) with a uniformly random vector v∈Vl containingu.A will make the query
Qu toH and the reduction responds to it with a uniformly random string in {0, 1}k;
(c) it rewinds A to the point corresponding to the end of round (1) of the protocol, then runs again point
(b).
A willC-open the nodeu in points (b) and (c) of the reduction with two diﬀerent values with a probability
at least p(k)· (r(k)2− 2−k).
In general the reduction doesn’t know the values 𝓁(u1),...,𝓁 (ud) and it can’t ﬁgure out which of the queries
made by A in the round (2) of the protocol is Qu. But A is ppt so we can ﬁnd a q(k)∈ poly(k,S ) that
upper-bounds the number of queries made by A toH during round (2).
A will C-open the node u, by guessing the exact point in time Qu is queried, with two diﬀerent values
with a probability at least q(k)−1·p(k)· (r(k)2− 2−k). Hence, this reduction violates the binding property
of the Merkle Tree. ⊓ ⊔
We are ready now to prove the Theorem.
By contradiction, suppose there exists an adversary A for the protocol Σ4. By applying Lemma 2, we
extract with noticeable probability a partial H ˜α-labeling, ensure that A(h) computed that labeling during
round (1) and that the hint h is independent ofH ˜α. Hence, satisfying the hypotheses of Lemma 1.
This gives us, with overwhelming probability, a pebbling sequence P of GN,k with m wildcards having
pebbling space S′ = S
k +d, m = O( N
lnk). In addition, the pebbling time of P is a lower bound for the
execution time ofA during round (1). To apply Theorem 1, we ﬁx N such that
N−l> 4S′ + 2m + 1, (3)
where l denotes the number of wildcards that are in T(GN,k).
Givenc∈ (0, 1) and ϵ> 0, we have that (2 +ϵ)m +l⩽cN. If we ﬁnd N such that
N> 4S′ +cN + 1,
(hence N> 4γS′ +γ, where γ = 1/(1−c)) then the inequality (3) will follow. (This is main reason why we
have set N :=⌈4γS′ +γ⌉ in the Protocol Σ4.)
By applying Theorem 1, the execution time T ofA is such that
T> (N−l)
(N− 2S′−m
2S′ +m + 1
)k
>c′(1 +ϵ)k, (4)
wherec′ is a constant that is a lower bound forN−l. The value (1+ϵ)k derives from the fact that, eventually,
N− 2S′−m> (1 +ϵ)(2S′ +m + 1).
Equation (4) shows that the execution time of A is exponential in k. This is not possible as, by hypothesis,
A is ppt. ■
12
On the Space Gap of the Protocol. The prover algorithm can be implemented basically in two ways. The most
natural implementation is to ﬁrst build the labeling for all the nodes in the graph and then apply the Merkle
Tree, while keeping in memory the labeling which is reused during the second phase of the prover algorithm.
Through this algorithm, the space gap of the prover is O(logS) while the time complexity is essentially
dominated by the one labeling phase. Another way to implement the prover algorithm is by computing the
labeling and the Merkle Tree simultaneously. In this way the algorithm can reuse space resulting in a strategy
with space gap O(1). Note however that, in this implementation, the prover must build the labeling twice
(once for the commitment and then during the challenge phase).
4 A 2-messages PoSpace protocol
We apply the standard Fiat-Shamir paradigm to the PoSpace scheme given in Section 3.1 by using two
independent Random OraclesH,L:
– H :{0, 1}∗→{ 0, 1}k is used by the prover for the labeling of the graph;
– L :{0, 1}k→Vl given the commitmentC as input, it yields the second veriﬁer’s message (of the protocol
Σ4).
Let (Σ4.Gen,Σ 4.P,Σ 4.V) the PoSpace deﬁned in Figure 3.1. We deﬁne in Figure 4.1 a 2-messages PoSpace:
we call Σ2 = (Gen, P, V) this protocol. Furthermore, let H′ :{0, 1}∗→{ 0, 1}k be a RO then the function
f(x) :=Σ2.P(pk, 1S,H′(x)) is a non-interactivePoSpace that satisﬁes the syntactic deﬁnition of PoWs in [14].
Generator Gen on input 1k returns pk′ := (pk,L),
where pk←Σ4.Gen(1k) andL is a RO
Common input: k,S, pk
Veriﬁer V Prover P
1. Pick α←{ 0, 1}k
2. Let v =L(C)
Check Σ4.V(pk, 1S,α,C, v,Π ) = 1
α
(C,Π )
C :=Σ4.P(pk, 1S,α )
v :=L(C)
Π :=Σ4.P(pk, 1S,α, v)
Fig. 4.1. The 2-messages (one-stage) PoSpace protocol Σ2 = (Gen, P, V).
Theorem 3. The ProtocolΣ2 in Figure 4.1 is a PoSpace.
Proof. Completeness and Succinctness follow from the fact that Σ4 is a PoSpace as proved in Theorem 2.
To prove Soundness, we reduce an adversary A for the scheme Σ2 to an adversaryB for the scheme Σ4 (of
Figure 4.1). Suppose, by contradiction, there exists an adversary A, a hint h←A (pk′) and a value S such
that for k large enough:
Pr
[
SndA,A′
Σ2,S(k)
]
>k−c.
Let q(k) be a polynomial that upper-bounds the number of queries made by A to the RO L. For each
0⩽ i < q(k), let Qi be the i-th query made by A to the oracle L. Without loss of generality, we can
assume that all the Qi’s are diﬀerent and A veriﬁes her output certiﬁcate before sending it: if A hasn’t
found a valid certiﬁcate, she outputs the empty string. Thus, either there exists an index m such that
13
(C,Π )←A (h, pk′,α ;ρ), with Qm = C and Σ4.V
(
pk, 1S,α,C, L(C),Π
)
= 1, or A(h, pk′,α ;ρ) outputs the
empty string. Moreover:
Pr[(C,Π )←A (h, pk′,α )∧Qm =C]>k−c·q(x)−1.
Notice that the probability above states that the outputs ofA will be the same value asked byA toL at the
m-th call. However, the value Qm is a random variable that may depend on all the randomness used until
them-th call. We divide the randomness used byA into two parts,ρ1 andρ2:ρ1 is the randomness used by
A before she has made the m-th query to the oracle L, ρ2 is the remaining randomness.
By an averaging argument, there exists a setting of ρ1 such that the following equation holds
Pr
ρ2,H,L
[
(C,Π ) :=A(h, pk′,α ;ρ1‖ρ2)∧Qm =C
]
>k−c·q(x)−1 (5)
Now the valueQm is a random variable that depends only on the randomness of the challengeα, the ROs
H andL, and ρ1. Therefore, by repeating many times the TM A(h, pk′,α ;ρ1‖ρ2) for a uniformly random ρ2
using the same oracles H,L, we’ll get the same value Qm as the m-th query to L. We deﬁne the ppt TM
with adviceB′ that on input pk and advice ρ1,m outputs the hint ˜h := (A′(pk,L),Q′,m,ρ 1), whereQ′ is
the set of RO queries made by A′ toH andL.
DeﬁneB(˜h, pk, 1S) :
– Wait for the message α;
– ComputeA(˜h, pk,α ;ρ1) and reply to RO queries from A viaH orL respectively;
until she makes the m-th RO query toL. Let Qm be such a query;
– Pause the machineA;
– if Qm∈Q′ abort.
– Send Qm to Σ4.V;
– Wait for the message v from Σ4.V;
– choose ρ2 uniformly at random;
– Resume A and reply to the query Qm with v and use as randomness ρ2;
– If A outputs the empty string, send the empty string to Σ4.V;
else let (C,Π ) be the output of A;
– if C =Qm then send Π to Σ4.V
else send the empty string to Σ4.V.
First, we show that the value Qm has high min-entropy. Since|Q′|∈ poly(k,S ), this implies that B will
abort with negligible probability.
By the equation (5), there exists an Hα-labeling 𝓁 with m =O(N/ lnk) faults such that Qm = MTs(𝓁).
LetR′ be the set of RO replies made by H andL to the RO queries of A′. As α is uniformly random in
{0, 1}k then
~H∞( 𝓁|R′,α )> (|V (GN,k)|− m− 1)·k.
In fact only with negligible probability in k the setQ′ contains queries toH with preﬁx α. The min-entropy
of Qm is ω(logk) because MT is collision resistant. The probability that Qm is inQ′ is then negligible.
WhenB doesn’t abort the simulation of the protocol, Σ2 is perfect. Also notice that B needs space
S′ =S +O(log(poly(k))) whereS is from the simulations ofA andO(log poly(k)) from the auxiliary indexes.
Moreover, if the event in equation (5) holds, thenB will not send the empty string to Σ4.V. Hence, it follows
that the adversaryB, with access to the hint function ˜h and using space S′ fork large enough, is such that:
Pr
[
SndB,B′
Σ4,S′(k)
]
>k−c·q(k)−1− negl(k).
Therefore, we reach the contradiction that B is a winning adversary against protocol Σ4 which was proved
to be a PoSpace (Theorem 2).■
14
5 Weak Proof of Space
The concept of proof of space can lead to multiple interpretations. The main interpretation formalized in
the PoSpace deﬁnition requires that the prover can handle (i.e., read/write) space. In this section we provide
a deﬁnition for a weaker alternative of PoSpace we call weak Proof of Space ( wPoSpace). This captures the
property that the prover can just access space and formalizes what could eﬀectively be achieved by properly
adapting previous work on proof of storage [4,5, 33] and on memory-bound PoW as deﬁned in [1,13](where
the adversary model contemplates the existence of cache memory). The deﬁnition of wPoSpace is similar
to the Deﬁnition of PoSpace (Deﬁnition 2) (the only change is in the Soundness part). We will provide a
protocol which is a wPoSpace but not a PoSpace, hence wPoSpace is a strictly weaker notion than PoSpace.
Deﬁnition 4 ( wPoSpace). Consider Σ = (Gen, P, V) where Gen is a ppt TM, and P, V are interactive ppt
TMs. Let k∈ N be a security parameter and pk← Gen(1k). Suppose that the following points hold for all
S∈ N, S >k:
(Completeness) and (Succinctness) the same as in the PoSpace deﬁnition.
(weak-Soundness) For any ppt adversaryA, the following event:
wSndA
Σ,S(k) :=⟨A, V⟩ (pk, 1S) = 1∧ SpaceA(⟨A, V⟩, pk, 1S)<S,
has negligible probability (as a function of k).
Then we say that Σ is a (one-stage) Weak Proof of Space ( wPoSpace).
In the Soundness of PoSpace, the adversary can take advantage of an unbounded space machine which
is then unavailable during the protocol execution. In the Soundness of wPoSpace, instead, this is disallowed.
Notice that a wPoSpace’s adversary can perform some precomputation before the execution of the protocol
(i.e., before sending/receiving the ﬁrst message), however, such a precomputation cannot exceed the space
bound given.
Theorem 4. There exists a protocol which is a wPoSpace but not a PoSpace.
Proof. We start by providing a protocol which is not a PoSpace. Consider the protocol Σ4 in Figure 3.1
where the ﬁrst message α sent by V is always the same, say 0k. We callΣ3 this modiﬁed version of Σ4. The
protocol Σ3 is not a PoSpace. For any k and S∈ N, consider the hint h which is the H0k-labeling of GN,k
plus the complete Merkle-Tree of that labeling. We deﬁne an adversary that sends the commitmentC that is
inh and, for any veriﬁer’s second message v, reads the right answer from h. That adversary needs to access
h in read-only mode, hence without using any additional working space.
The protocol Σ3 is a wPoSpace. The structure of the proof is the same as the one of Theorem 2. We
provide a particular case of the PoK Lemma (Lemma 2) where the hint h is the empty string and ˜α is 0k.
For the sake of clarity, we restate the PoK Lemma for this particular setting.
Lemma 3. Consider the protocol Σ3 = (Gen, V, P), a ppt adversaryA, a space parameter S and a security
parameterk such that pk← Gen(1k).
If Pr
[
wSndA
Σ3,S(k)
]
is noticeable, then there exists a randomness ˜ρ such thatA fed with the randomness
˜ρ during the round (1) of the protocol Σ3 calculates anH0k-labeling 𝓁 of GN,k with m faults such that the
following holds:
– m =O
( N
lnk
)
and
– for any well-labeled node u in 𝓁 we have (˜α‖u‖𝓁(u1)‖... ‖𝓁(ud))∈Q ,
whereQ is the set of queries to H made by A when fed with randomness ˜ρ until the end of round (1) and
{u1,...,u d} =Γ−(u).
15
By contradiction, suppose there exists an adversary A for the protocol Σ3. By applying Lemma 3, we
extract a partial H0k-labeling, ensuring that A computed that labeling during round (1) (hence satisfying
the hypotheses of Lemma 1).
This gives us, with overwhelming probability, a pebbling sequenceP ofGN,k withm wildcards and with
pebbling space S′ = S
k +d, m =O( N
lnk). The pebbling time of P is a lower bound for the execution time of
A before round (2). The rest of the proof follows exactly the same structure of the proof of Theorem 2 and
it is therefore omitted. ⊓ ⊔
Acknowledgements. We are grateful to Krzysztof Pietrzak for his insightful comments and suggestions.
References
1. Martin Abadi, Mike Burrows, Mark Manasse, and Ted Wobber. Moderately hard, memory-bound functions.
ACM Trans. Internet Technol. , 5(2):299–327, May 2005.
2. Mehmud Abliz and Taieb Znati. A guided tour puzzle for denial of service prevention. In ACSAC, pages 279–288.
IEEE Computer Society, 2009.
3. Giuseppe Ateniese, Ilario Bonacina, Antonio Faonio, and Nicola Galesi. Proofs of space: When space is of the
essence. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2013/805, 2013. http://eprint.iacr.org/.
4. Giuseppe Ateniese, Randal Burns, Reza Curtmola, Joseph Herring, Lea Kissner, Zachary Peterson, and Dawn
Song. Provable data possession at untrusted stores. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM conference on Computer
and communications security , CCS ’07, pages 598–609, New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM.
5. Giuseppe Ateniese, Seny Kamara, and Jonathan Katz. Proofs of storage from homomorphic identiﬁcation pro-
tocols. In ASIACRYPT, pages 319–333, 2009.
6. Adam Back. Hashcash - a denial of service counter-measure. Technical report, 2002.
7. Boaz Barak and Oded Goldreich. Universal arguments and their applications. In IEEE Conference on Compu-
tational Complexity , pages 194–203. IEEE Computer Society, 2002.
8. R. B. Boppana, J. Hastad, and S. Zachos. Does co-np have short interactive proofs? Inf. Process. Lett., 25(2):127–
132, May 1987.
9. Lu´ ıs Caires, Giuseppe F. Italiano, Lu´ ıs Monteiro, Catuscia Palamidessi, and Moti Yung, editors. Automata,
Languages and Programming, 32nd International Colloquium, ICALP 2005, Lisbon, Portugal, July 11-15, 2005,
Proceedings, volume 3580 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science . Springer, 2005.
10. Ran Canetti, Ben Riva, and Guy N. Rothblum. Refereed delegation of computation. Information and Compu-
tation, 226(0):16 – 36, 2013.
11. Kai-min Chung, Yael Kalai, and Salil Vadhan. Improved Delegation of Computation Using Fully Homomorphic
Encryption. pages 483–501, 2010.
12. Yevgeniy Dodis, Leonid Reyzin, and Adam Smith. Fuzzy extractors: How to generate strong keys from biometrics
and other noisy data. In Christian Cachin and JanL. Camenisch, editors,Advances in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT
2004, volume 3027 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 523–540. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2004.
13. Cynthia Dwork, Andrew Goldberg, and Moni Naor. On memory-bound functions for ﬁghting spam. Advances in
Cryptology-Crypto 2003, 2003.
14. Cynthia Dwork and Moni Naor. Pricing via processing or combatting junk mail. Advances in Cryptology-
CRYPTO’92, pages 139–147, 1993.
15. Cynthia Dwork, Moni Naor, and Hoeteck Wee. Pebbling and proofs of work. Advances in CryptologyCRYPTO
2005, pages 37–54, 2005.
16. Stefan Dziembowski, Sebastian Faust, Vladimir Kolmogorov, and Krzysztof Pietrzak. Proofs of space. Cryptology
ePrint Archive, Report 2013/796, 2013. http://eprint.iacr.org/.
17. Stefan Dziembowski, Tomasz Kazana, and Daniel Wichs. Key-evolution schemes resilient to space-bounded
leakage. In CRYPTO, pages 335–353, 2011.
18. Stefan Dziembowski, Tomasz Kazana, and Daniel Wichs. One-time computable self-erasing functions. In Pro-
ceedings of the 8th conference on Theory of cryptography , TCC’11, pages 125–143, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011.
Springer-Verlag.
19. Stefan Dziembowski, Krzysztof Pietrzak, and Sebastian Faust. Proofs of space and a greener bitcoin. talk
presented at Workshop on Leakage, Tampering and Viruses , Warsaw 2013, 2013.
20. Dario Fiore and Rosario Gennaro. Publicly veriﬁable delegation of large polynomials and matrix computations,
with applications. Proceedings of the 2012 ACM conference on Computer and communications security - CCS
’12, page 501, 2012.
16
21. Oded Goldreich and Johan Hastad. On the complexity of interactive proofs with bounded communication.
Information Processing Letters, 1998.
22. Shaﬁ Goldwasser, Yael Tauman Kalai, and Guy N. Rothblum. Delegating computation: interactive proofs for
muggles. In Proceedings of the 40th annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing , STOC ’08, pages 113–122,
New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.
23. Ari Juels and John G. Brainard. Client puzzles: A cryptographic countermeasure against connection depletion
attacks. In NDSS. The Internet Society, 1999.
24. Nikolaos P. Karvelas and Aggelos Kiayias. Eﬃcient proofs of secure erasure. SCN, 2014.
25. Joe Kilian. A note on eﬃcient zero-knowledge proofs and arguments (extended abstract). In Proceedings of the
twenty-fourth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing , STOC ’92, pages 723–732, New York, NY, USA,
1992. ACM.
26. Thomas Lengauer and Robert E. Tarjan. Asymptotically tight bounds on time-space trade-oﬀs in a pebble game.
Journal of the ACM (JACM) , 29(4):1087–1130, 1982.
27. Silvio Micali. Computationally sound proofs. SIAM Journal on Computing , 30(4):1253–1298, 2000.
28. Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. May 2009.
29. Colin Percival. Stronger key derivation via sequential memory-hard functions. presented at BSDCan ’09, 2009.
30. Daniele Perito and Gene Tsudik. Secure code update for embedded devices via proofs of secure erasure. In
ESORICS, pages 643–662, 2010.
31. Nicholas Pippenger. Superconcentrators. SIAM J. Comput. , 6(2):298–304, 1977.
32. R.E.A.C.Paley and A.Zygmund. A note on analytic functions in the unit circle. page 266272, 1932.
33. Hovav Shacham and Brent Waters. Compact proofs of retrievability. In Proceedings of the 14th International
Conference on the Theory and Application of Cryptology and Information Security: Advances in Cryptology ,
ASIACRYPT ’08, pages 90–107, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008. Springer-Verlag.
34. Adam Smith and Ye Zhang. Near-linear time, leakage-resilient key evolution schemes from expander graphs.
IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive , 2013:864, 2013.
35. Martin Tompa. Time-space tradeoﬀs for computing functions, using connectivity properties of their circuits. In
Proceedings of the tenth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing , STOC ’78, pages 196–204, New York,
NY, USA, 1978. ACM.
36. Brent Waters, Ari Juels, J. Alex Halderman, and Edward W. Felten. New client puzzle outsourcing techniques
for dos resistance. In Proceedings of the 11th ACM conference on Computer and communications security , CCS
’04, pages 246–256, New York, NY, USA, 2004. ACM.
A Proof of the Pebbling Theorem (Theorem 1)
For the sake of convenience we re-write the statement of that theorem here. For the deﬁnitions of pebbling
games, pebbling space and pebbling time we refer the reader to Section 2.
Pebbling Theorem (Theorem 1). There exists a family of eﬃciently sampleable directed acyclic graphs
{GN,k}k,N∈N with constant fan-in d,N input nodes, N output nodes and kN logN nodes in total, such that:
1. Any pebbling sequence that pebbles ∆ output nodes has pebbling space at most S pebbles and m wildcards,
where|∆|> 4S + 2m + 1, and pebbling time T such that
T>|∆|
(N− 2S−m
2S +m + 1
)k
.
2. There exists a pebbling sequence that pebbles the graph GN,k which has pebbling space N + 2 and needs
time O(kN logN).
3. For any node v∈V (GN,k), the incoming nodes ofv and the position ofv in ﬁrst lexicographic topologically
order of GN,k are computable in O(k logN).
The family of graphsGN,k we build is made from DAGs that arek layered stack of superconcentrators [31]
with N inputs and N outputs.
17
Deﬁnition 5 (superconcentrator). We say that a directed acyclic graphG = (V,E ) is an N-superconcentrator
if and only if
1. |S(G)| =|T(G)| =N,
2. for each S⊆ S(G) and for each T ⊆ T(G) such that |S| =|T| = 𝓁 there exist 𝓁 vertex-disjoint paths
fromS to T , i.e. paths such that no vertex in V is in two of them.
Fig. A.1. An example of 16-superconcentrator: the Butterﬂy Graph
Deﬁnition 6 (stack of superconcentrators). Given an N-superconcentratorG we deﬁne the graph G×k,
the stack ofk copies ofG, inductively as follows: G×1 =G andG×k is obtained from G×(k−1) andG by ﬁrst
renaming the vertexes of G so that they do not appear in the vertexes of G×(k−1), obtaining a graph G′, and
then by identifying T(G×(k−1)) with S(G′).
Not any k layered stack of superconcentrators satisﬁes points 2 and 3 of the Pebbling Theorem. To obtain
those properties we use the following well-known superconcentrator: theButterﬂy Graph BN built by putting
together two FFT graphs with N inputs and outputs [35]. An example of such construction (for N = 16) is
given in Figure A.1.
It is easy to see that the family of graphs GN,k :=B×k
N satisﬁes points 2 and 3 of the Pebbling Theorem
and it is a k layered stack of N-superconcentrators. It remains to prove only point 1.
For superconcentrator graphs we can prove a tradeoﬀ between pebbling space and pebbling time, even
for pebbling games with wildcards. This result is based on a generalization of the “Basic Lower Bound
Argument” (BLBA) by Tompa [35].
Lemma 4 (BLBA with wildcards). Consider anN-superconcentratorG, a setM⊆ T(G), and a pebbling
sequenceP = (P0,...,P 𝓁) with m wildcards that pebbles M. Let A be the set of all elements of S(G) pebbled
and unpebbled at some point in P. If|M|>|P0| +|P𝓁| +m + 1 then|A|>N−|P0|−| P𝓁|− m.
Proof. By contradiction suppose that|A|<N −|P0|−| P𝓁|− m, this means that|Ac|>|P0| +|P𝓁| +m + 1
and every element inAc, by deﬁnition, is not pebbled and unpebbled. Take any B⊆Ac such that|B| =|M|
then, as G is an N-superconcentrator, we have π1,...,π |M| vertex disjoint paths from B to M. Let W be a
set of m faults forP. By construction|M|>|P0∪P𝓁∪W| thus we have some path π from some element v
ofB to some element w ofM such that π∩ (P0∪P𝓁∪W ) =∅. By deﬁnition of Ac, and hence of B,v is not
pebbled and unpebbled and v⁄∈ P0∪P𝓁∪W , thus v⁄∈ Pi for each i∈ [𝓁]. As π∩ (P0∩W ) =∅, we must
have that π∩Pi =∅ for each i∈ [𝓁]. But then the vertex w is not in ⋃
i∈[𝓁]Pi contradicting the fact thatP
pebbles M. ⊓ ⊔
18
Theorem 5 (Pebbling Theorem (point 1)). LetG×k be a stack of k copies of an N-superconcentrator
G, ∆⊆ T(G×k) andP a pebbling sequence for G×k with m wildcards that pebbles ∆. Let S be the pebbling
space ofP and T the pebbling time of P. If|∆|> 4S + 2m + 1 then
T>|∆|
(N− 2S−m
2S +m + 1
)k
.
Proof. Let G1,...,G k be the k copies of G that form G×k. Suppose we want to pebble a set M⊆ T(Gi)
such that|M|> 2S +m+1 and let A1,...,A n be disjoint subsetes ofM such thatA1 are the ﬁrst 2S +m+1
elements of M to be pebbled in P, A2 are the second 2S +m + 1 elements of M to be pebbled in P and so
on. Clearly we have that the number of these sets is n =
⌊
|M|
2S+m+1
⌋
. By Lemma 4 we have that for each Aj
there exists a set β(Aj) in S(Gi), whose elements are pebbled and unpebbled, of size at least N− 2S−m.
Thus we have that the total number of elements in S(Gi) that have been pebbled and unpebbled is at least
(N− 2S−m)
⌊
|M|
2S+m+1
⌋
. Notice now that each β(Aj)∈ T(Gi−1) hence we can reapply the argument above
to it provided that for each j,|β(Aj)|> N− 2S−m> 2S +m + 1 (and this is implied by the fact that
N>|∆|> 4S + 2m + 1). Thus starting from T(Gk) = T(G×k) we can prove by induction, going back to
G1, that at least
|∆|
(N− 2S−m
2S +m + 1
)k
actions of pebbling and unpebbling take place on S(G1) = S(G×k). As each action is an elementary step in
the pebbling gameP we have that the result follows. ⊓ ⊔
B Merkle Tree
Consider the complete binary tree T over n leaves. Without loss of generality we can assume that n is a
power of 2 by using padding if necessary. Label the i-th leaf with li, then, use a collision resistant hash
(CRH) function Hs :{0, 1}2k→{ 0, 1}k with random seed s to propagate the labeling l of the leaves to a
labeling φ along the tree T up to the root according to the following rules:
1. φ(v) :=li if v is the i-th leaf of T ,
2. φ(v) := Hs(φ(v1)‖φ(v2)) where v1,v 2 are the two children of v.
Then the commitment for a string l is the label φ(r) of the root of the tree: we denote it with MTs(l). The
commitment is succinct in fact it has size k which is independent of n.
An opening for the i-th element in the sequence l is an ordered sequence formed by elements of {0, 1}k
that are intended to be the label li of the i-th leaf of T together with the labels φ(vj) for each vj that is a
sibling of vertices in the path from the root of the tree to the i-th leaf. An example of opening is shown in
Figure B.1.
e
c
b a
d
Fig. B.1. An example of opening: c = (a,b,c,d,e )
We denote with Open s(l,i ) the opening formed by li together with all the φ(vj). Notice that from
Opens(l,i ) it is possible to compute φ(w) for each vertex w in the path from the root to the leaf at the i-th
19
position. In particular it is eﬃcient to compute MTs(l). The opening is succinct in fact it has size k· logn
which is (almost) independent of n. In general, given an opening c = (c1,...,c logn) for some position i we
can think of it as equivalent to Open s(l,i ) and compute the label of the root according to the given c and
positioni. If this value is equal to MTs(l), we say thatc opens thei-th position toc1. As H is a CRH function,
then for any i, it is guaranteed that MTs(l) can open the i-th position only to li.
20