Proofs of Replicated Storage
Without Timing Assumptions ⋆
Ivan Damg˚ ard, Chaya Ganesh, and Claudio Orlandi
Computer Science Department, DIGIT, Aarhus University, Denmark
{ivan,ganesh,orlandi}@cs.au.dk
Abstract. In this paper we provide a formal treatment of proof of repli-
cated storage, a novel cryptographic primitive recently proposed in the
context of a novel cryptocurrency, namely Filecoin.
In a nutshell, proofs of replicated storage is a solution to the following
problem: A user stores a ﬁle m on n diﬀerent servers to ensure that
the ﬁle will be available even if some of the servers fail. Using proof of
retrievability, the user could check that every server is indeed storing
the ﬁle. However, what if the servers collude and, in order to save on
resources, decide to only store one copy of the ﬁle? A proof of replicated
storage guarantees that, unless the (potentially colluding) servers are
indeed reserving the space necessary to storen copies of the ﬁle, the user
will not accept the proofs. While some candidate proofs of replicated
storage have already been proposed, their soundness relies on timing
assumptions i.e., the user must reject the proof if the prover does not
reply within a certain time-bound.
In this paper we provide the ﬁrst construction of a proof of replication
which does not rely on any timing assumptions.
1 Introduction
Consider a scenario where a user A wants to use the cloud or some other decen-
tralized network of servers to store and distribute some ﬁle m to other users. To
make sure she and other users will be able to access the ﬁle later on, A stores
several replicas of m in diﬀerent locations. However, A suspects that the servers
she is using are adversarial and may collude, for instance to save on costs by
using less space than they are supposed to. So she will be interested in checking
that indeed unique space has been dedicated to each replica, and it is natural to
require that this can be veriﬁed, even if all servers are controlled by an adversary.
We will call this proof of replication.
A ﬁrst issue to note is that the well-known notions of proof of retrievability or
proof of space (which we discuss in more detail below) do not solve the problem if
⋆ This work was supported by the: Protocol Labs RFP Program; Danish Indepen-
dent Research Council under Grant-ID DFF-6108-00169 (FoCC); European Research
Council (ERC) under the European Unions’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
program under grant agreement No 669255 (MPCPRO) and No 803096 (SPEC);
Concordium Blockchain Research Center, Aarhus University, Denmark.
each replica is simply a copy ofm. Such proofs allow a user to check that a given
ﬁle is retrievable from a server, much more eﬃciently than by simply retrieving
the ﬁle. However, even if A asks for a proof of retrievability of m from each of
the servers and all these proofs are successful, this may simply be because the
user is actually talking to the adversary who stores only a single copy of m.
Another idea that comes to mind is that A could let each replica be an
encryption of m under some key K, but with fresh randomness for each replica.
If the encryption is IND-CPA secure, the adversary cannot distinguish this from
encryptions of random independent messages, and hence it seems they are forced
to store all replicas in order for them to be retrievable later. While this intuition
can in fact be proved, this would not be a satisfactory solution: recall that we
want that anyone, not just A, can retrieve the original ﬁle, so A would have
to share K with other users. However, if any of these users collude with the
adversary, the security breaks down. Besides, a solution that does not require A
to store secret information for later is clearly more practical.
The idea of proof of replication was introduced in Filecoin [Lab17a, Lab17b],
a decentralized storage network 1. They articulate a list of properties that they
desire from such a notion. They deﬁne a Sybil attack which is exactly what
we discussed above: if an honest client wishes to store the same ﬁle m on n
diﬀerent servers, an adversary can store these using sybil identities (all servers
are controlled by one adversary) and successfully pass the storage audit, while
essentially storing only one copy of the ﬁle.
While the Filecoin paper does not give a formal treatment of proof of repli-
cation, they propose a construction for what they call a time-bounded proof of
replication. In such a notion, the ﬁle to be stored is encoded so that the en-
coding process is slow: slow enough for a client to distinguish between honest
proving time, and potentially adversarial proving time which includes the time
to re-encode. Thus, the encoding process is, by design, distinguishably more ex-
pensive than honest proving time. This notion is realized by using a block-cipher
and slowing it down by block chaining, and a time-bounded proof of replication
is a proof of storage of a replica that is encoded in this way.
The basic problem with all time-bounded schemes is the handling of recom-
puting attack: the encoding has to be made so slow that even a powerful server
cannot encode faster than the time a proof takes. This is harder than it may
seem at ﬁrst: even if we know for sure how many operations are needed to encode
for a given value of security parameter, the actual time it takes depends on the
hardware held by the adversarial parties, and so is beyond the control of hon-
est users. This makes a concrete choice of parameters very diﬃcult: should we
compensate for the adversary being more powerful than we expect and choose
a very slow encoding thus making life harder also for honest clients when they
encode? Or should we choose parameters more aggressively and run a bigger risk
1 Other related notions in the context of data replication have been studied earlier in
the cryptographic literature; we discuss the connection and diﬀerences in the related
work section.
2
of being cheated? It would clearly be better if we did not have to make such a
choice.
We ask if we can do better in all the above aspects: can we have a proof
of replication scheme that provably resists sybil attacks, and is not
time-bounded?
Our Results. We give a formal treatment of proofs of replication, by giving a
deﬁnition that captures the desired properties as well as a construction which we
prove secure according to the deﬁnition. The construction works in the random
oracle model and can be instantiated from any one-way permutation. We con-
centrate on the case where the client doing the encoding is honest, as this seems
to be the most important case in practice, and is in line with the deﬁnitions of
proof of retrievability and storage.
Each replica of the ﬁlem to be stored in our construction has sizeO(|m|+κ),
where|m| is the length ofm andκ is the security parameter. To verify replication,
the user conducts a proof of retrievability with each server. Any such proof can
be used, so we inherit whatever communication complexity that proof has.
Very roughly speaking, the idea in our solution is that the adversary ﬁrst
receives each of the replicas to store, where each replica is a special encoding of
m. The adversary may now store a state for later use, which in the honest case
would contain all replicas. What we show is that, no matter how the adversary
computes the state, if it is signiﬁcantly smaller than the combined size of all
replicas, then some of the proofs of retrievability will fail, unless the adversary
breaks a computational assumption.
Let us consider what this exactly guarantees us. Since the proofs of retriev-
ability are extractable, the above guarantees that the replicas cannot be com-
pressed i.e., the adversary must reserve enough space to store all replicas, and
this space must contain some data which is equivalent (up to polynomial time
computation) to the replicas of the ﬁle. But is this the best we can do? Why
don’t we ask that the adversary in fact stores a concatenation of all the replicas?
Unfortunately, this is impossible to achieve: even honest servers will most likely
store the same information in diﬀerent formats (think of little- vs. big-endian
representation). So we certainly cannot expect that the adversary will store ex-
actly the same data that was received from the client. However, this should
not matter from a security point of view, as long as the original data can be
eﬃciently recovered.
In conclusion: it is impossible to force the corrupted servers to store exactly
the n replicas or n copies of the ﬁle. Therefore, the best we can hope for is
what we do in this paper: no matter how the corrupted servers behave, it is
possible to recovern distinct, incompressible encodings of the same ﬁle, thus the
servers cannot pass the veriﬁcation unless they reserve the necessary space for
all replicas. Note, however, that in such a scenario, the corrupted servers have
no incentive to do anything else than simply store the replicas.
The main diﬀerence between our work and previously proposed solutions to
the problem, is that our solution does not require the use of time: while the
3
original, informal deﬁnition of proof of replication states that it should be hard
for the server to recompute the encodings of the ﬁle in the time it takes to verify
the proof, our deﬁnition is much stronger as it rules out that any polynomially
bounded attacker who uses less storage than claimed can pass the veriﬁcation.
As discussed above, this makes implementing proof of replications much easier,
since one does not need to worry about ﬁnding an appropriate value for the
veriﬁer timeout.
To avoid misunderstandings, we emphasize that even if our deﬁnitions and
proof work with a single adversary that handles all replicas, the actual use case
includes several servers that each store one replica (if they are honest). Since it
is clearly impossible to check if a server stores something without talking to that
server, the communication complexity of our protocol must be proportional to
the number of servers 2.
Finally, our main construction achieves public veriﬁability in the sense that
if the encoder is honest, then anyone can interact with the servers and verify the
proofs. At the end of the paper we discuss extensions which allow to cope with
malicious encoders.
1.1 Related Work
Proofs of retrievability. A lot of user data today is outsourced for storage on
the cloud both because of large volumes of data, and for reliability in case of
failure of local storage. The problem with cloud storage is that of maintaining
integrity of data and enforcing accountability of the storage provider. Proofs of
retrievability, ﬁrst formalized by Juels and Kaliski in [JK07] address this problem
by allowing for audits. In a proof of retrievability, a client can store a ﬁle on the
server, while storing (a short) veriﬁcation string locally. In an audit protocol,
the client acts as the veriﬁer and the server proves that it possesses the client’s
ﬁle. The property that the server “possesses” a ﬁle is formalized by the existence
of an extractor that retrieves the client’s ﬁle from a server that makes a client
accept in the audit protocol. Since their introduction, there have been several
works [SW08, DVW09] constructing proof of retrievability schemes with a proof
of security and eﬃcient audit procedures. One property we prioritize in this
work is public veriﬁability where any party can take the role of the veriﬁer in the
audit protocol, not just the client who originally stored the ﬁle. This means the
client’s state storing any veriﬁcation information for the ﬁle should not contain
any secrets. The construction of [SW08] gives a proof of retrievability scheme
secure in the random oracle model that allows public veriﬁability.
Proofs of space. A proof of space is a protocol where a prover convinces a veriﬁer
that it has dedicated a signiﬁcant amount of disk-space. Proofs of space were
introduced in [DFKP15] as an alternative to proof of work (PoW), and further
2 Of course, if a single server would store all replicas, we can optimize the communi-
cation needed, this is also easy to see for our protocol, but this hardly seems like an
interesting use case.
4
studied in [RD16, AAC+17]. There have been proposals based on proof of space
like chia network [chi17] and Spacemint [PPK +15]. Very roughly, a proof of
space gives the guarantee that it is more “expensive” for a malicious server that
dedicates less space than an honest server to successfully pass an audit.
Data replication. Curtmola et al. [CKBA08] and Barsoum et al. [BH11] propose
protocols that enable proofs of data replication in the private veriﬁer model,
where the client stores a secret key that is used for veriﬁcation. The work of Hao
and Yu [HY10] allows public veriﬁability but nevertheless requires the client
to store a secret. The work of Etemad and K¨ up¸ c¨ u [EK13] studies replicated
provable data possession, but does not formalize replicated storage, and the
client need not be aware of any replication. Finally, the protocol of Armknecht
et al. [ABBK16] is also in the private veriﬁcation model, and in addition, uses
RSA time-lock puzzles which results in a protocol with a time-bounded property
that we elaborate on below.
Filecoin. Filecoin is a decentralized storage network [Lab17a]. Essentially this
can be seen as a network of independent storage providers that oﬀer veriﬁable
ﬁle storage and retrieval services. In the Filecoin protocol, miners earn protocol
tokens by providing data storage services.
To be used in the Filecoin context, a proof of replicated storage should sat-
isfy several properties. First, the scheme should protect against Sybil attacks as
described above e.g., a corrupt server should not be able to impersonate n dif-
ferent servers while storing a single copy of the ﬁle. Then, the scheme should be
publicly veriﬁable, meaning that any user (not only the original encoder) should
be able to verify the proof. It is also crucial that the security deﬁnition allows
the adversary to choose the ﬁle m. This is because an adversary could request
form to be stored, and then prove thatm was stored to collect network rewards.
Finally, the scheme should be resilient against generation attacks, meaning that
the adversary should not be able to reconstruct an encoding “on the ﬂy” when
a proof of storage is requested.
Our main construction cannot be directly used in the Filecoin context since
the soundness of the proof relies on the encoder being honest. Thus, a malicious
encoder colluding with malicious servers could perform a generation attack i.e.,
persuade other users that some servers are storing several copies of a ﬁle without
reserving any space. At the end of the paper, we discuss how to extend our
solution to handle malicious clients too.
Time-bounded Proofs of Replication. In a recent work by Pietrzak [Pie18], a
construction for proof of replication based on proof of space is given. A proof
of replication is not formally deﬁned, and therefore it is not clear what is the
replication property that the construction satisﬁes. In addition, since a proof of
space is the starting point of the construction, it has the same “time-bounded”
property as the Filecoin construction, since a malicious server can pass the au-
dit by recomputing data. More recently, [FBBG18, BBBF18, CFMJ18, Fis18]
construct proofs of replication based on slow encodings. They have the same
5
time-bounded ﬂavour of other recent works and is thus signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
from ours.
Comparison with Hourglass scheme [VDJO +12]. We note that our construction
and the construction of [VDJO+12] are reminiscent of each other; at a high level
both involve repeated applications of inversion of a trapdoor permutation and
a random permutation. However, there are diﬀerences in both the goals and the
details of the constructions.
The diﬀerence between the goal of the present work and the Hourglass
schemes can be summarized as follows: Hourglass only tries to guarantee incom-
pressibility of a single encoding (such that the original ﬁle can be receoverd),
whereas the goal of our proof of replicated storage is to get diﬀerent incompress-
ible encodings to be stored on independent servers, such that the original ﬁle
can be recovered interacting with a single server. Regarding the constructions,
our work applies the random permutation over all blocks of the ﬁle and produces
randomized and independent encodings to be stored on each server, which makes
a notable diﬀerence in the our analysis 3.
1.2 Technical Overview
The existing time-bounded proofs use a public deterministic encoding function.
The problem is that this always allow a malicious server to recompute encoded
data and this may lead to a successful recomputation attack if the server has
suﬃcient computational resources. Our observation is that one can instead make
the encoding be probabilistic. Now the adversary will only see the encoded data
but not the randomness that the client used to encode. One may therefore hope
that recomputing an encoding is not only slow, but completely unfeasible. On
the other hand, decoding must still be easy for anyone.
To illustrate the idea of our solution, we start with a toy example: we assume
that we are given oracle access to a random permutationT , and its inverse4, act-
ing on strings {0, 1}n. As is well known (and discussed in detail later) we can
instantiate such an oracle in the standard random oracle model. In order to
create replicas of a ﬁle, A will generate an instance of a one-way trapdoor per-
mutationf :{0, 1}n↦→{ 0, 1}n, with trapdoor tf. For simplicity, we assume that
the ﬁle m to store is an (n− logn)-bit string. Then the i’th replica is deﬁned to
be (f,f−1(T (m||i))), where|| denotes concatenation and f is a speciﬁcation of
the 1-way permutation. Clearly, anyone can easily compute m from a replica by
computingf in the forward direction and callingT−1. It turns out that this con-
struction is secure if the adversary computes the state to store for later in a very
restricted way, namely he forgets all information about at least one replica, say
thei’th one. Namely, the adversary forgets both the encoding (f,f−1(T (m||i)))
and the intermediate value T (m||i).
3 It is hard to compare our analysis with that of Hourglass since in [VDJO +12] only
an informal security argument of incompressibility is given.
4 One can think of the random permutationT as a random oracle which can be invoked
in both directions.
6
We can now argue that if the adversary is nevertheless able to produce thei’th
replica, he will have to invert the one-way permutation: from the output of the
adversary (f,f−1(T (m||i))) we can (as the encoding can be decoded eﬃciently),
extractT (m||i). But, we assumed that the state did not contain any information
about this value (except for a negligible amount following from the fact that it
must be diﬀerent from other outputs). Hence he must call the oracle to get
T (m||i). Therefore, in a security reduction, we can take a challenge value y and
reprogramT such that T (m||i) =y. Now, the i’th replica (that we assumed the
adversary could produce) is exactly the preimage of y under f.
Of course, we cannot reasonably assume that the adversary behaves in this
simple-minded way. As mentioned, we only want to assume that the state stored
is smaller than the combined size of the replicas, say by a constant factor. To
overcome this problem, we iterate the above construction several times, so that
T is called several times while preparing a replica. Now there are many more
outputs from T than the adversary can remember, and we show that by the
setting the parameters right, at least one of these is almost uniform in the view
of the adversary. Now we can place a challenge value for the one-way permutation
in this position by an argument similar to the above.
2 Preliminaries
Notation. We denote the concatenation of two bit strings x and y by x||y.
Throughout, we useκ to denote the security parameter. We denote a probabilis-
tic polynomial time algorithm by PPT. A function is negligible if for all large
enough values of the input, it is smaller than the inverse of any polynomial. We
use negl to denote a negligible function. We use [1 ,n ] to represent the set of
numbers{1, 2,...,n }. For a randomized algorithm Alg, we use y← Alg(x) to
denote that y is the output of Alg on x. We write y
R
←Y to mean sampling a
valuey uniformly from the set Y.
2.1 Trapdoor permutations
A collection of trapdoor permutations is a family F ={fpk :Dpk→D pk} such
that:
– There exists a PPT algorithm KeyGen such that (pk,sk )← KeyGen(1κ),fpk
is a permutation.
– There exists a PPT algorithm that given pk samples uniformly fromDpk.
– There exists a PPT algorithm that on input pk and x∈ Dpk, computes
fpk(x).
– There exists a PPT algorithm that on inputsk andfpk(x), computesx, that
is, f−1
sk (fpk(x)) =x.
Deﬁnition 1. A trapdoor permutation family F ={fpk :Dpk→D pk} is said
to be hard to invert if the following holds: for all PPT algorithms A, there exists
7
a negligible function negl such that
Pr[fpk(z) =y : (pk,sk )← KeyGen(1κ),x←D pk,y←fpk(x),
z←A(pk,y )]≤ negl(κ)
When the domain and range is clear from context, we omit the subscript pk
and only writeD.
Deﬁnition 2. We call a trapdoor permutation family a B-leakage trapdoor per-
mutation if the following holds: For all PPT algorithms (A1,A 2), there exists a
negligible function negl such that
Pr[fpk(z) =y : (pk,sk )← KeyGen(1κ),x←D pk,
L←A1(x,pk ),y←fpk(x),z←A2(y,L (x))]≤ negl(κ)
where the output length of L is bounded by B bits.
Note that every trapdoor function family is also a B-leakage trapdoor per-
mutation family for B = logκ.
RSA trapdoor permutation. The RSA trapdoor permutation is given by:
– KeyGen(1κ): Choose κ-bit primes p,q , let N = pq. Choose e such that
gcd(e, (p− 1)(q− 1)) = 1, let d be such that ed = 1 mod (p− 1)(q− 1).
Return (pk = (e,N ),sk =d)
– Forx∈ Z∗
N, given pk = (e,N ), compute fpk(x) =y =xe modN.
– Fory∈ Z∗
N, and sk =d, compute f−1
sk (y) =yd modN
The RSA inversion problem is assumed to be hard for anyA running in time
polynomial in κ.
Invertible Random Oracle. We assume the algorithms of the construction and
the adversary have access to an invertible random oracle (IRO): that is oracle
access to Π :D→D and Π−1 :D→D .
We discuss here how to plausibly implement such an oracle: The indiﬀeren-
tiablity framework, ﬁrst proposed by Maurer et al. [MRH04], informally says
that given ideal primitives G and F , a construction CG is indiﬀerentiable from
F , if there exists a simulatorS with oracle access toF such that (CG,G ) is indis-
tinguishable from (F,SF ). Coron et al. [CHK+16] showed that a 14-round Feistel
network where the round functions are independent random oracles is indiﬀeren-
tiable from a random permutation. A series of subsequent works [DKT16, DS16]
show that 8 rounds is suﬃcient. Thus, using a Feistel network appears like a
plausible way of instantiating the oracle we need.
Unfortunately, the indiﬀerentiability composition theorem is not known to
apply to security notions that are captured by games that have multiple stages [RSS11].
Our security notion of proof of replication is captured using a multi-stage game,
and therefore the result of [RSS11] applies.
Therefore, the construction described below should only be seen as a plausible
instantiation of an invertible random oracle.
8
A plausible oracle instantiation. In our constructions, we make use of an invert-
ible random oracle H that acts on strings of arbitrary length, and an invertible
random oracle T that has the same domain as a trapdoor permutation. H is in-
stantiated using a regular Feistel network. In the following we discuss an heuristic
instantiation of T on pairs of outputs of RSA and obtain trapdoor permutation
f and IRO T with the same domain.
We deﬁne a trapdoor permutationf : (ZN)2→ (ZN)2 as follows:f(x1,x 2) =
(f′(x1),f′(x2)) where f′ is the RSA permutation f′ : ZN→ ZN. Note that N is
part of the public key of the RSA permutation. The input and output of T are
elements in ( ZN)2. We note that we can instantiate the Feistel construction in
this domain as well by replacing XOR with multiplication modulo N i.e., given
a random oracle G that maps inputs in Z∗
N to strings that are twice the length,
we can deﬁneF : (ZN)2→ (ZN)2 on pairs of values modulo N as follows:
FH(L||R) =s||t, where s =L·G(R) modN,t =R·G(s) modN
where· is product modulo N. Note that G(x) modN is close to uniform in
Z∗
N, therefore,F is invertible except with negligible probability i.e., if F is not
invertible then a non-trivial factor of N is found.
2.2 Proof of retrievability
Proofs of retrievability, introduced by Juels and Kaliski [JK07] allow a client to
store data on a server that is untrusted, and admit an audit protocol in which
the server proves to the client that it is still storing all of the data. A scheme
without random oracle was given in [DVW09], whereas [SW08] allows public
veriﬁability. A proof of retrievability (PoR) scheme consists of three algorithms,
Gen,P,V. We recall the deﬁnition from [SW08, DVW09] below.
– The generation algorithm takes as input a ﬁle F∈{ 0, 1}∗ and outputs a ﬁle
to be stored on the server and a tag (veriﬁcation information) for the client.
(F∗,τ )← Gen(F )
– TheP,V algorithms deﬁne an audit protocol to prove retrievability of the
ﬁle. TheP algorithm takes as input the processed ﬁleF∗ and theV algorithm
takes the tag τ. At the end of the audit protocol, the veriﬁer outputs a bit
indicating whether the proof succeeds or not.
{0, 1}←⟨P (F∗),V(τ)⟩
A PoR scheme needs to satisfy correctness and soundness. Correctness requires
that for all ﬁle F ∈{ 0, 1}∗, and for all ( F∗,τ ) output by Gen(F ), an honest
prover will make the veriﬁer accept in the audit protocol.
⟨P(F∗),V(τ)⟩ = 1
9
Informally, a PoR scheme is sound if for any prover that convinces the veriﬁer
that it is storing the ﬁle, there exists an algorithm called the extractor that
interacts with the prover and extracts the ﬁle. We give the formal deﬁnition
below.
Experiment ExptPoR-sound
A (κ)
– The adversaryA picks a ﬁle F∈{ 0, 1}n.
– The challenger creates (F∗,τ )← Gen(F ) and returns F∗ toA.
– A can interact withV(τ) by running many proofs and seeing whether V out-
puts 0 or 1.
– A outputs a prover algorithm (ITM) P∗ and returns this to the challenger.
– The challenger runsb←⟨P∗,V(τ)⟩, and runs the extractor, ˜F = extP∗
(τ,n,κ )
– Output 1 if b = 1∧ ˜F⁄=F , or 0 otherwise.
Fig. 1: Soundness for Proofs of Retrievability.
Deﬁnition 3 (Soundness for Proof of Retrievability). A proof of retriev-
ability (PoR) Gen,P,V satisﬁes soundness if for any PPT adversary A, there
exists an extractor ext such that the advantage of A
AdvPoR-Sound
A (κ) = Pr[ExptPoR-Sound
A (κ) = 1]
in the experiment described in Figure 1 is negligible in κ.
The deﬁnition in [DVW09] discusses the notion of knowledge soundness versus
information soundness. If the deﬁnition holds for the class of eﬃcient extractors,
the scheme satisﬁes knowledge soundness. A somewhat weaker notion is that of
information soundness where the running time of the extractor is not restricted.
2.3 Min entropy
Recall that the predictability of a random variable X is maxx Pr[X =x] and its
min-entropy H∞(X) is− log (maxx Pr[X =x]). The average case min-entropy is
deﬁned as follows. Let X and Y be random variables.
˜H∞(X|Y ) =− log
(
Ey←Y
(
2−H∞(X|Y =y)
))
We make use of the following lemma which states that the average min-
entropy of a variable (from the point of view of an adversary) does not go down
by more than the number of bits (correlated with the variable) observed by the
adversary. We recall the entropy weak chain rule for average case min entropy
below in Lemma 1.
10
Lemma 1. ([DORS08]) Let X andY be random variables. If Y has at most 2λ
values, then
˜H∞(X|Y )≥ H∞(X)− H0(Y ) = H∞(X)−λ
where H0(Y ) = log|support(Y )|
3 Deﬁning Proof of Replication
While several candidates of proof of replication have already been proposed, they
all use timing assumptions, and we are not aware of any formal deﬁnition of the
security properties that such a proof should satisfy without timing assumption.
It is indeed non-trivial to come up with the “right” deﬁnition, due to the fact
that we ask the adversary to store many copies of the same ﬁle . Thus simply
requiring the existence of an extractor algorithm (as in proof of knowledge or
proof of storage) is not suﬃcient: it is not enough that the adversary knows the
ﬁle, the adversary should know multiple replicas of the same ﬁle. But what does
it mean for an extractor to extract replicas of the same ﬁle? Before providing our
deﬁnition, we introduce some notions of encodings which will be used to build
up our solution.
3.1 Replica Encodings
We now deﬁne ReplicaEncoding as a tuple of algorithms ( rEnc, rDec) where rEnc
takes a message m∈{ 0, 1}∗ and outputs a replica encoding of m∈{ 0, 1}∗,
y← rEnc(κ,m )
The rDec algorithm takes a replica encoding and returns a message i.e., m←
rDec(y).
Deﬁnition 4 (Replica encoding). A pair (rEnc, rDec) is a secure replica en-
coding if the following holds:
– Completeness: The probability of incorrect decoding is negligible i.e.,
Pr[rDec(rEnc(κ,m ))⁄=m]< negl(κ)
– Soundness: Consider the game soundA1,A2 between an adversary and a chal-
lenger deﬁned in Figure 2. A replica encoding scheme is c-sound (for a con-
stant c, 0<c< 1) if for any (A1,A2), there exists a negligible function negl
such that the following holds.
Pr [|state|<cvβ|v← soundA1,A2]≤ negl(κ)
whereβ is the bit-length of an encoding y.
– Eﬃciency:|y| =|m| +O(κ).
11
Experiment soundA1,A2
– The adversaryA1 chooses a ﬁle m∈{ 0, 1}k
– The challenger outputs n encodings of m
y(i)← rEnc(κ,m )
for i∈ [1,n ] and returns (y(1),...,y (n)) toA1.
– A1 outputs a state state←A 1(y(1),...,y (n))
– The challenger runsA2 on state.
(˜y(1),..., ˜y(n))←A 2(κ, state)
– Let vi = 1 if ˜y(i) =y(i), and 0 otherwise. Output v = ∑n
i=1vi.
Fig. 2: Soundness of a Replica Encoding scheme
Discussion. The main measure of eﬃciency for a replica encoding is its expansion
factor, in other words the ratio|y|/|m|. Clearly, the smaller the expansion factor
the more interesting the scheme is. Looking ahead, all our constructions will
have|y| =|m| +O(κ).
We motivate here some of the choices in our deﬁnition. First note that the
completeness requirement allows the ﬁle to be reconstructed from a single replica
encoding. This captures the functional requirement in the honest usage of proofs
of replication, where a client would store diﬀerent encodings of the ﬁle on diﬀer-
ent servers and should be able to recover the ﬁle as long as one server is storing
their encoding.
When deﬁning soundness, we consider a monolithic adversary A which con-
trols all colluding servers. To be able to meaningfully talk about the space that
the adversary uses for storing the ﬁle, we split the adversaryA into two partsA1
andA2, whereA1 receives the replica encoding from the challenger (represent-
ing the honest client) and A2 is the part of the adversary returning (some of)
the encodings to the client at a later stage, using the state thatA1 transferred
toA2. We do not require that A2 outputs all of the received encoding, instead,
we use the variable v to count how many of the replica encodings A2 is able to
return. The deﬁnition of soundness then intuitively states that the adversary can
at most return the number of replicas that “ﬁt” into the state (where we allow
for a constant “slack” c, to avoid trivial attacks where the adversary forgets few
bits and then “guesses” them right before returning the encodings – in practice
one should think of c as any constant close to 1).
As a sanity check of our deﬁnition, let’s consider a construction of replica
encoding that is “too trivial”: deﬁne y(i) = (m,ri) i.e., every replica is simply
the message concatenated with some random string ri. Due to incompressibility
12
of random data the adversary needs to store all the ri’s, but clearly only needs
to store one copy of m and can still recompute all encodings. This is of course
not desirable, so our deﬁnition had better not accept this construction. Indeed it
does not: the adversary can break the soundness property because he can choose
to returnv≥ 2 encodings using storage only|m|+v|r|<cv|y| - which is trivially
true for any interesting case (remember in eﬃcient encodings |y|≈| m| and c is
close to 1).
3.2 Proof of Replication
We now use the notion of encodings to meaningfully capture the replication prop-
erty. A proof of replication scheme consists of a tuple of algorithmscreate, retrieve
and an audit protocol deﬁned by two algorithms, P,V for the prover and ver-
iﬁer respectively. create is a randomized algorithm that takes as input a ﬁle
m∈{ 0, 1}∗, that is to be replicated and stored, a replication factor n; and pro-
duces n replicas y(1),...,y (n) together with veriﬁcation information ver. Each
replica y(i) is sent the server i to be stored, and ver with the client to be used
for veriﬁcation in the audit protocol. retrieve is a deterministic algorithm run by
anyone that takes as input a replica y(i) and outputs a ﬁle m∗.
In the audit protocol, each server (prover) has a replica y(i), and the client
(veriﬁer) has ver. At the end of the audit, the veriﬁer outputs a bit b indicating
whether the audit was successful or not. We denote the protocol executing the
prover and veriﬁer algorithms by⟨Pi(˜y(i)),V(ver,i )⟩.
We require the scheme to satisfy completeness and soundness properties as
deﬁned below. Note that when considering the honest usage of the our protocol
(e.g., completeness), each server is able to prove to the client that they are
storing the ﬁle independently5. On the other hand, when considering adversarial
behaviour (e.g., soundness), we assume that all servers are under the control of
a monolithic adversary.
All our algorithms below are parametrized by a security parameter, even
when omitted as in the description below.
Deﬁnition 5 (Proof of Replication). A scheme PoRep = (create, retrieve,P,V)
where,
(y(1),...,y (n), ver)← create(m,n ), for m∈{ 0, 1}∗,n∈ Z
m∗
i = retrieve(y(i)),i∈ [1,n ]
{0, 1}←⟨P i(˜y(i)),V(ver,i )⟩
is a proof of replication scheme if the following properties are satisﬁed.
– Completeness. For an honest client and honest server,
5 For instance, an honest server does not need to communicate with the other servers,
nor know that they exist.
13
• for (y(1),...,y (n), ver)← create(m,n ),m∗
i = retrieve(y(i)),m∗
i =m∀i∈
[1,n ]
• The audit protocol interaction between honest client and honest server
succeeds, that is, the client accepts and outputs b = 1.
⟨Pi(˜y(i)),V(ver,i )⟩ = 1
– Soundness. We deﬁne the soundness game soundE
A1,A2 between an adversary
and a challenger in Figure 3. The scheme PoRep is c-sound (for a constant
c, 0<c< 1) if for any (A1,A2), there exists an extractor E and a negligible
function negl such that the following holds.
Pr
[
u<v ∨| state|<cvβ|(u,v )← soundE
A1,A2
]
≤ negl(κ)
whereβ is the bitlength of an encoding y.
Experiment soundE
A1,A2
• The adversaryA1 chooses a ﬁle m∈{ 0, 1}k
• The challenger runs ( y(1),...,y (n), ver) ← create(m,n ) and returns
(y(1),...,y (n)) toA1.
• A1 outputs a state state←A 1(y(1),...,y (n))
• The challenger runs ⟨A2(state),V(ver,i )⟩, let vi be the output of V for all
i∈ [1,n ] and v = ∑n
i=1vi.
• The challenger runs the extractor.
(˜y(1),..., ˜y(n)) =EA2(κ, ver,k )
• For alli∈ [1,n ], deﬁne ui = 1 if ˜y(i) =y(i), and u = ∑n
i=1ui
The output of the game soundE
A1,A2 is (u,v ).
Fig. 3: Soundness of a proof of replication scheme
The deﬁnition above guarantees that the malicious servers, even colluding,
cannot make the veriﬁer accept more proofs than the storage they have used.
4 Constructing Proof of Replication
We begin by giving a high-level overview of our construction. Following the idea
behind our deﬁnition, we create many independent encodings, and use a proof of
14
retrievability on the encodings. Even though each encoding can independently
be decoded to the same ﬁle without any secret information, the proof of re-
trievability on the encodings enforces that the server stores each encoding and
therefore dedicates space for each replica. Recall that in Section 1.2 we have
already described a simple solution which works in a restricted model in which
the adversary is restricted to either store or delete entire replicas. Of course this
is not a realistic threat model and a malicious server could choose to forget ar-
bitrary parts of each encoding (say, a constant fraction). Now, to pass the audit,
the server would have to compute a preimage of the underlying trapdoor permu-
tation, but given a constant fraction of bits of the preimage. Unfortunately, the
deﬁnition of security for trapdoor permutation does not allow us to say that this
is not possible; in other words, we cannot construct a reduction for this kind of
adversaries.
To address this problem, we use the following approach: we start by applying
an (invertible) random oracle (IRO) on the message concatenated with a short
seed (which is diﬀerent for each replica), and then we use the trapdoor permu-
tation on the result. We then iterate the IRO and the trapdoor permutation as
a round function suﬃciently many times. Intuitively the trapdoor permutation
of the round function ensures that the adversary has to do something “hard” in
every round, while the IRO of the round function is used to make sure that the
“hard tasks” are all independent.
Again, in any given round, we cannot rule out that the adversary might
have stored some (small) information that allows to easily invert the trapdoor
permutation. However, since we repeat this for many rounds and the adversary
must store some pre-image information at every round to potentially break the
trapdoor permutation, eventually the total information that the adversary would
have to store will exceed the bound necessary for replicated storage.
When dealing with large ﬁles (e.g., larger than the size of the input/output of
T ), we split the ﬁle in blocks. To make sure that all blocks depend on the entire
ﬁle (for instance, to prevent the server from “de-duplicating” individual blocks
which might appear in multiple ﬁles), we ﬁrst apply a “large” IRO on the entire
ﬁle. Then, in the round function, we apply a “small” IRO on each individual
block. Thanks to this, the number of rounds in the encoding only needs to be
proportional to the block size, instead of the entire ﬁle size (as it was the case
in an earlier version of this paper).
Note that our combination of the RSA trapdoor permutation with a random
oracle is reminiscent of full domain hash-signatures and, to a greater extent, CCA
secure encryption via RSA and OAEP. Note however that, in our construction,
we apply the oracle and the trapdoor permutation for multiple rounds, and the
domain of the random oracle is a pair of blocks for the RSA permutation. The
idea of iterating a combination of RSA with a random oracle was used before
in [VDJO+12], however (apart from their work having a less in-depth treatment)
there are two major diﬀerences, namely that they did not consider replication
as an application, and that they use a strictly weaker notion of security, namely
“near-incompressibility”.
15
Eﬃciency of decoding. We note that, when instantiating the construction with
the RSA trapdoor permutation, it is possible to use a small exponent (i.e.,e = 3).
Now decoding would be much faster then encoding, which is a desirable property
in applications where a single user uploads a ﬁle which is then retrieved by a
large number of users.
4.1 Replica Encodings
We now proceed to describe our construction in detail, and ﬁrst construct a
replica encoding scheme ReplicaEncoding = (rEnc, rDec) in Figures 4 and 5.
Let m∈{ 0, 1}k′
be a message to be encoded.
– Choose a string γ uniformly at random from {0, 1}κ, and let y0 = H(m||γ),
where H :{0, 1}λ→{ 0, 1}λ is a invertible random oracle (IRO), and λ =
k′ +κ.
– Let ( KeyGen,f−1,f ) be trapdoor permutation over domain D. (sk,pk ) ←
KeyGen(1κ). Divide y0 into s blocks such that each block is in D. That is,
y0 = Y10||···|| Ys0. Let T :D→D be an IRO over D. We then iterate the
following round function: For each round j from 1 to r, and for each block
t∈ [1,s ] deﬁne
• Apply the IRO T ,
Ztj =T (Ytj−1)
• Invert the trapdoor permutation block-wise,
Ytj =f−1
sk (Ztj)
Let yj =Y1j||···|| Ysj
– Let R = (yr,pk )
– Return R
Fig. 4: The Replica Encoding Algorithm rEnc(κ,m )
Soundness of the scheme. Before formally proving the soundness of the scheme,
we give an overview of the proof idea. If the state state that is passed from A1
toA2 is small, then the adversary A2 cannot “remember” all the answers to
the queries that A1 made in the ﬁrst part of the game since the outputs of a
random oracle are incompressible. However, we can extract the outputs of the
random oracle used during the encoding from the adversary since the replica
encodings can be eﬃciently decoded. This implies that the adversary must make
some queries to the random oracle in phase 2 of the game. Now, for each of the
16
For a replicaR = (yr,pk ), Parseyr asY1r||···|| Ysr. For each roundj fromr down
to 1, and each block t∈ [1,s ], compute
– Round j:
• Apply the trapdoor permutation block-wise,
Ztj =fpk(Ytj)
• Invert the IRO,
Ytj−1 =T−1(Ztj)
– Lety0 =Y10||···|| Ys0. ComputeH−1(y0) and parse the output asm||γ where
m is the ﬁrst k′ bits. Return m.
Fig. 5: The replica decoding algorithm rDec(R)
queries the adversary makes, there are two options: either the response to the
query has full entropy in the view of the adversary, or it doesn’t. If it has full
entropy, i.e., if the state contained no (or very little) information about what the
oracle would answer, then we are done, as we will elaborate next. But ﬁrst let us
consider if not; that is, the response to the query made did not have full entropy
inA2’s view. This means that the state must have contained some information
about the answer to the query. Now, since the encoding uses the random oracle
in each round, and since the state that the adversary is allowed to remember
is small, by carefully accounting for the entropy budget for each query made,
we argue that after a certain round, the entropy in the state is exhausted and
therefore there is at least one query that the adversary had to make to the
oracle whose response has full entropy in order to win the game. Finally, once
we have found such a query for which we know that the output of the oracle
has full entropy that A2 had to make to win the game, we can reprogram the
random oracle with a challenge for the trapdoor permutation. Thus since A2 is
nevertheless able to produce the replicas, we use it to break the assumption and
reach a contradiction.
Theorem 1. Assuming T,H are invertible random oracles, the construction
ReplicaEncoding = (rEnc, rDec) using trapdoor permutation f is a secure replica
encoding scheme, replication parameter n as per Deﬁnition 4. For number of
roundsr> (cn+1)k
B , it is complete and c-sound with soundness error
ϵ≤
(
ϵ′ + 2−k(1−c) +qs22−k
)
nrs
wherek = log|D|,D is the domain of f and T , s is the number of blocks, q
the number of queries to the RO and the advantage of any adversary in B-leakage
inversion of the permutation f is at most ϵ′.
17
Proof. We use the notation R(i) to identify the encoding stored on server i.
Completeness. For n encodings that are created honestly, R(i)← rEnc(m,κ ),
m∗ = rDec(R(i)). Then, due to the invertibility of T,H and the trapdoor per-
mutationf, m∗ =m,∀i.
Soundness. Assume there exists an adversary (A1,A2) such that
Pr [|state|<cvβ|v← soundA1,A2]>ϵ .
Therefore, the adversaryAT
2 outputs R(i1),··· ,R (iv), where each ij∈ [1,n ].
LetI⊂ [1,n ],|I| =v be the set of indices indicating the replicas thatA2 outputs
correctly. We argue that if the state is too small, then the adversary does not
have enough entropy to store information aboutR(i),∀i∈I and therefore one of
the R(i) must have been recomputed, (by making relevant queries to T ), which
we use to invert the B-leakage trapdoor permutation. The proof idea is that
since the state is small, in round r,A2 must have learned some of the Z values
of roundr from responses of T . If the response of T to these queries do not have
full entropy in A2’s view given the state, then this deﬁcit must be accounted
for in the size of the state. We continue this argument for every round going
backwards from the last round, by reasoning about the set of relevant queries
made in each round, and accounting for every query made that did not have
entropy inA2’s view with B bits in the state. We then hit a round where the
response of T for one ofA2’s queries must have high enough entropy from A2’s
point of view. Such a query is guaranteed to exist since the state size is used
up after enough queries of the former kind. We use the response to this query
to embed a challenge and invert the trapdoor permutation. We now proceed to
give the reduction.
LetB be an adversary whose task is to invert the trapdoor permutation. B
receives a challenge ( ˆpk, ˆx), and wins if it outputs ˆy such that f ˆpk(ˆy) = ˆx.B in-
teracts with (A1,A2) in the soundness game.B receives a ﬁle m∈{ 0, 1}k′
from
A1.B creates encoded replicas honestly, except for one of the replicas chosen at
random (call its index i∗∈ [1,n ]), in which the challenge will be embedded. For
now we only use the public key ˆpk. Since B does not know the corresponding
secret key,B cannot compute this encoding honestly. Thus,B deﬁnes the encod-
ingR(i∗) as ( ˆpk,yr) for a uniformly random yr. Then it “decodes” yr down toy0
(by following the decoding procedure) and ﬁnally programs the random oracle
H such that H−1(y0) = (m||γ(i∗)) for some random string γ(i∗). More in detail:
– Choose random y(i∗)
r ∈{ 0, 1}λ.
– For each roundj fromr down to 1, parse y(i∗)
j =Y1j||···|| Ysj and, for each
block t∈ [1,s ], compute:
• Apply the trapdoor permutation block-wise,
Ztj =f ˆpk(Ytj)
18
• Invert the IRO,
Ytj−1 =T−1(Ztj)
– Let y0 =Y10||···|| Ys0.
– Pick a random value γ∈{ 0, 1}κ and program the IRO H to output y0 on
input (m,γ ).
– Return R(i∗) = (y(i∗), ˆpk)
B responds to any other oracle queries of A1 honestly, and ﬁnally gives
(R(1),··· ,R (n)) to A1, where R(i) for i⁄= i∗ is created honestly. A1 outputs
a state state. Now,B interacts withA2. It runs A2 on state, and receives and
responds toA2’s oracle queries in the following way.B chooses a random round
j∗∈ [1,r ], and a random block t∗∈ [1,s ] to embed the challenge ˆx in. If A2
queriesT onY (i∗)
t∗j∗−1,B sets the response to embed its challenge ˆx in the following
way. SetZt∗j∗ = ˆx and,
T (Y (i∗)
t∗j∗−1) =Zt∗j∗
The rest of the queries are answered honestly. IfA2 makes a query Y (i∗)
t∗j∗ = ˆy
such that, f ˆpk(ˆy) = ˆx,B outputs ˆy. If there is no such query, B outputs⊥. We
now compute the probability thatB wins in the trapdoor permutation inversion
game. Consider the case when ( m||γ) ﬁts into D, and therefore there is only
one block in the encoding. We later show how the argument extends to multiple
blocks. Let k be the block length, that is, the bit length of elements in D. We
therefore have |state| < cvk,c < 1. Consider the min-entropy of the random
variable state, which is at most the bit length, H∞(state)≤ cvk.A2 on state
returns,
{R(i)}i∈I←A 2(state)
forR(i) = (y(i)
r ,pki). Since there is only one block in the encoding, y(i)
r ∈D and
can be decoded to obtain z(i)
r =fpki(y(i)
r ).
LetYr =y(i1)
r ||···|| y(iv)
r andZr =z(i1)
r ||···|| z(iv)
r ,ij∈I.
Since each replica is computed by using independent randomness γi, the
queries to the oracle are diﬀerent for each replica, and therefore each z(i)
r is
unpredictable. We have,
H∞(z(i)
r |z(1)
r ,··· ,z (i−1)
r ,z (i+1)
r ,··· ,z (n)
r ) =k
and therefore, H∞(Zr) =vk. SinceZr can be extracted fromAT
2 (state) by decod-
ing, either the state contains information about each z(i) inz(1)||···|| z(v), orA2
must make relevant RO queries, that is, query the RO on the inputs correspond-
ing to z(i). By the conditional rule for average case min-entropy (Lemma 1),
˜H∞(Zr|state)≥ H∞(Zr)− H0(state)
˜H∞(Zr|state)≥ H∞(Zr)−cvk =vk−cvk
19
Zr is extracted by making no RO queries only with probability less than
2−vk(1−c) < 2−k(1−c) which is negligible for constant c (even in the worse case
where the adversary replies with a single replica). Therefore, there is at least one
RO query. LetQr be the indices inI that indicates the queries which arey-values
of round r. That is, ∀u∈Q r,A2 queried T on y(u)
r−1, and T (y(u)
r−1) = z(u)
r . Let
qr =|Q| denote the number of “relevant”r-round queries. For each query, either
the state contains information about the response or not; we consider the two
cases where the state stores <B bits of information or ≥B of information of a
query response. If the state contains <B bits of information about responses in
round r, thenB wins if the challenge is embedded in that response and we are
done. Otherwise, the state contains information about each z(u)
r which means
the state stores at least B bits of information for each query.
H∞(state)≥qrB
Now, let us consider the set of queries made with indices in Qr. For each
y(u)
r−1,u∈Q r, we can extract z(u)
r−1 by computing the decoding. That is, z(u)
r−1 =
fpku(y(u)
r−1), for y(u)
r−1 ∈ D. These qr elements are outputs of RO on diﬀerent
inputs, and therefore have full entropy. LetZr−1 =z(u1)
r−1||···|| z(uqr )
r−1 where each
ui∈Q r. We have H∞(Zr−1) = qrk. IfZr−1 can be extracted from AT
2 (state),
either the state contains information aboutz(i)
r−1,∀i∈Q r, orA2 must make more
RO queries. If there are no more queries, then H∞(state)≥vk. Therefore, there
must be more queries on inputs corresponding to the indices in Qr.
Letqr−1 be the number of relevant round (r−1) queries. Deﬁne a set of query
indicesQr−1, from which we can extract Zr−2 = z(u1)
r−2||···|| z
(uqr−1 )
r−2 , for ui∈
Qr−1. Again, for each query, either the state dedicates <B bits of information,
in which case B wins if the challenge is embedded in that response and we are
done. Otherwise, the state stores at least B bits of information about each y(u)
r−1,
and therefore we have,
H∞(state)≥qrB +qr−1B
Making a similar argument as before, there must be more RO queries corre-
sponding to the indices in set Qr−1. Thus, we have, after r rounds,Zr,..., Z1
are extracted fromA2(state), and we have
H∞(state)≥
r∑
i=1
qiB
LetA2 make RO queries in each roundj for the replicas given by the indices
inQj such that the reduction could not successfully embed a challenge in any
of the responses. Then after r rounds, setting,
r∑
i=1
qiB−cvk =k
20
We get ˜H∞(Z1|state)≥k, when r>k (cv + 1)/B.
Therefore, at some round 𝓁≤ r, the entropy of the response is full when
making an RO query at round 𝓁. That is,∃𝓁∈ [1,r ],w∈ [1,n ] such that,
˜H∞(z(w)
𝓁 |state) =k
When there are multiple blocks, we have|state|<cvβ . Since the permutation
H is applied to the entire ﬁle concatenated with a random string γ, before r
rounds ofT andf, the adversary can ﬁnd ﬁles such that the output of H results
in the same blocks only with probability (( qs)2 + 1)/2k where q is the number
of queries and s the number of blocks. Then the above argument holds for each
block independently.
The probability that the challenge is programmed into the RO response of one
of the blocks ofz(w)
𝓁 is the probability thati∗ =w,j∗ =𝓁 which is 1/vrs> 1/nrs
(in the worse case where n = v). Thus the probability that B wins is at least
ϵ
nrs− 2−k(1−c)−qs22−k.
⊓ ⊔
As any trapdoor function is also trivially B-leakage secure for B = log(k),
we obtain the following corollary.
Corollary 1. Assuming T,H are invertible random oracles, the construction
ReplicaEncoding = (rEnc, rDec) using trapdoor permutation f is a secure replica
encoding scheme for replication parameter n as per Deﬁnition 4. For number of
roundsr> (cn+1)k
logk , it is complete and c-sound with soundness error
ϵ≤
(
ϵ′ + 2−k(1−c) +qs22−k
)
nrs
wherek = log|D|,D is the domain of f and T , s is the number of blocks, q the
number of queries to the RO and the advantage of any adversary in inverting
the permutation f is at most ϵ′.
Of course, for speciﬁc trapdoor permutations, it might be possible to assume
B-leakage security for larger values ofB thus achieving better round complexity.
4.2 From Replica Encodings to Proofs of Replication
We now construct a proof of replication scheme create, retrieve,P,V. The idea
is very simple: to construct a proof of replication we use the replica encoding
scheme from the previous section to create replicas, and then apply a proof of
retrievability on the encoded replicas. The proof of security is also simple, as an
adversary that breaks soundness for the proof of replication can be used to break
the soundness property of the proof of retrievability scheme or the soundness of
the replica encoding scheme.
The create procedure is formally described in Figure 6. The prover, and
veriﬁer algorithmsP,V are the same as the prover and veriﬁer in the proof of
retrievability. Finally, the retrieve algorithm simply runs the replica decoding
algorithm rDec if the proof of retrievability accepts.
21
Let PoR = (Gen,P,V) be a proof of retrievability scheme. Given a ﬁlem∈{ 0, 1}k′
,
and a replication factor n:
– For eachi∈ [1,n ]
• Run R(i)← rEnc(m,κ )
• ({ ˜R(i)}i,τi) = PoR.Gen(R(i))
– Set ver ={τi}i
– ˜R(i) is sent to the server i for storage and ver is returned to the client.
Fig. 6: create(m,n ): Create replicated storage
Theorem 2. PoRep = (create, retrieve,P,V) is a proof of replication scheme for
replication parameter n secure as per Deﬁnition 5. It is complete and c-sound
with soundness error γ≤δ +ϵ where the underlying PoR scheme has soundness
errorδ, and the replica encoding scheme has soundness error ϵ.
Proof. We ﬁrst argue completeness: Given R(i) and pk, for encodings that are
created honestly, an honest server can recoverm∗ = retrieve(R(i)). By complete-
ness of the replica encoding schemerEnc, we haverDec(R(i)) = rDec(y(i),pk (i)) =
m,∀i.
We now argue the soundness of the construction. Let (A1,A2) be an adver-
sary, that wins the soundness game soundE
A1,A2 with advantage γ. Let (u,v )←
soundE
A1,A2.We consider the two cases:
Case 1. u < v. Let ext be the extractor of the PoR scheme, and let the ﬁle
output by ext be{ ˜R(i)}n
i=1. By assumption that u < vthere must be an
index i∈ [1,n ] such that the adversary A2 succeeds in the audit protocol
(i.e., vi = 1), but ˜R(i)⁄=R(i) (i.e., ui = 0). By the soundness of the proof of
retrievability scheme PoR, this happens only with probability δ.
Case 2. |state|≤ cvβ. In this case the adversary AT
2 succeeds in v audit pro-
tocols, and since u≥ v, the extractor E outputs ˜R(i) = R(i) for i∈ I ⊂
[1,n ],|I| =v. Let (B1,B2) be an adversary whose task is to break the sound-
ness of the replica encoding scheme rEnc.B1 interacts with (A1,A2) in the
soundness game. B1 receives a ﬁle m∈{ 0, 1}k′
fromA1, and outputs m
to its challenger. B1 receives n replica encodings (R(1),··· ,R (n)) from the
challenger, where the bit length of each encoding is β.B1 runs the PoR on
the replicas. ({ ˜R(i)}i, ver)← PoR.Gen{R(i)}i and returns{ ˜R(i)}i toA1.B1
outputs as state whateverA1 outputs with|state|≤ cvβ. For every success-
ful audit proof given byA2,B2 runs the extractorE(ver,n,κ ) of the scheme.
ThusB2 outputs ˜R(i) =R(i) for each i∈I with probability at least γ.
22
5 Dealing with Malicious Clients
We discuss here some limitations and possible extensions of our approach.
Our deﬁnition and construction so far has concentrated on the case where the
client is honest. This is not a problem for our base use-case where a user wants to
make sure they will be able to retrieve their ﬁles in the future, but it is a problem
in the Filecoin use case where servers are rewarded for the ﬁles they store. In
this case, we need to prevent against the so called generation attack and it is
therefore important to have some security guarantees when the client is corrupt
and might work with a set of corrupt servers to convince honest users that they
store many replicas whereas in fact the replicas are generated “on-the-ﬂy” for
each proof.
Our solution from the previous section does not work in this case, as a corrupt
user could share the trapdoor function secret key with the servers and now they
can indeed encode a replica on the ﬂy. If the client who owns the ﬁle is corrupt
and is the only user involved in the encoding process, then the adversary knows
everything about the encoding process, and a diﬀerent solution is needed. One
way to go is to involve several users in the encoding process and work under the
assumption that at least one of them is honest.
In a Filecoin-like scenario one could implement such a solution by rewarding
users for helping others to encode. We now describe two diﬀerent approaches to
such multi-user encoding.
Parallel Encoding. Given one-way trapdoor functions f1,...,f n that act on k-
bit strings, we deﬁne a new function F on kn bit strings by F (x1,...,x n) =
(f1(x1),...,f n(xn)), where each xi is a k-bit string. It is clear that F is a one-
way trapdoor function even with respect to an adversary who knows all but
one of the trapdoors for f1,...,f n. Namely, if the j’th trapdoor is unknown, we
can take a challenge yj, choose yi = fi(xi) for i⁄= j and random xi and give
(y1,...,y n) to the adversary. If he computes a preimage, then thej’th component
is the answer to challenge yj.
Note that our main result gives a construction that is secure based on any
one-way trapdoor function and so it also works for F .
Now, in the practical use-case, we will assume thatn users are involved, such
that useri hasfi as part of his public key and knows the corresponding trapdoor.
A public-key infrastructure is one of several ways to realize this. Then then users
can collaborate to encode: whenever we need to compute F , we can assume the
input to the current round is known (initially it will be the ﬁle to encode), so
each user i can apply the permutation oracle and compute and broadcast f−1
i
on his part of the result.
It follows immediately from the above that if at least one user is honest,
then this construction results in a secure replica encoding. Note also that the
contributions of each user can be veriﬁed by computing his function in the for-
ward direction. Moreover, the overhead in encoding size and the cost per bit of
encoding and decoding is the same as for the single honest user case. On the
23
other hand, we need a number of rounds for the encoding protocol that equals
the number of rounds in the encoding process.
Sequential Encoding. An obvious alternative is to do the encoding sequentially.
Namely, the ﬁrst user does an encoding of the input ﬁle using his (set of) trapdoor
functions and broadcasts the result. The second user encodes the output of the
ﬁrst, etc. In the end, we have an encoding that is essentially done just like our
original construction, only with more rounds. Note that one can decode the
output of each user and check the result is correct.
The intuition behind the security of this approach is the following: under
the assumption that at least one user is honest, we have the same security as
in the original construction assuming that at least one of the users is honest.
This is simply because the adversary does not know the trapdoors for the honest
member, and his encoding process involves the same number of random oracle
responses that we considered in the original proof. This approach increases the
size of the encodings but not signiﬁcantly (the complexity would grow from
O(|m| +κ) to O(|m| +n·κ) with n users). The cost of encoding and decoding
in this solution is a factor n larger than for the single honest user case. On the
other hand, the number of rounds in the encoding protocol is n, which may be
better than parallel encoding, depending on the concrete scenario.
6 Conclusions and Future Work
We gave two possible solutions to multi-user encoding above. However, there is
also a solution of a diﬀerent nature that comes to mind: namely we can share
a trapdoor (say, an RSA key) between a set of users and have them collaborate
to compute the encoding using that trapdoor function securely. This has the
advantage that an encoding looks just like what an honest client would produce,
we are not forced to have larger block size when many users are involved. Also,
decoding is as fast as in the honest client case, and one can set up the proto-
col such that just one participating client needs to be honest in order for the
secret key to not leak. On the other hand, encoding requires more work. For
the encoding protocol, one can take advantage of the huge body of literature
on distributed RSA key generation and distributed signing. Finding the optimal
solution for this approach is left for future work.
We also leave as an open question the problem of ﬁnding a secure replica
encoding where the number of rounds in the encoding process does not depend
on the number of replicas.
References
AAC+17. Hamza Abusalah, Jo¨ el Alwen, Bram Cohen, Danylo Khilko, Krzysztof
Pietrzak, and Leonid Reyzin. Beyond hellman’s time-memory trade-oﬀs
with applications to proofs of space. In Tsuyoshi Takagi and Thomas
Peyrin, editors, ASIACRYPT 2017, Part II , volume 10625 of LNCS, pages
357–379. Springer, Heidelberg, December 2017.
24
ABBK16. Frederik Armknecht, Ludovic Barman, Jens-Matthias Bohli, and Ghas-
san O Karame. Mirror: Enabling proofs of data replication and retriev-
ability in the cloud. In USENIX Security Symposium , pages 1051–1068,
2016.
BBBF18. Dan Boneh, Joseph Bonneau, Benedikt B¨ unz, and Ben Fisch. Veriﬁable
delay functions. In Hovav Shacham and Alexandra Boldyreva, editors,
CRYPTO 2018, Part I , volume 10991 of LNCS, pages 757–788. Springer,
Heidelberg, August 2018.
BH11. Ayad F Barsoum and M Anwar Hasan. On verifying dynamic multiple
data copies over cloud servers. IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive , 2011:447,
2011.
CFMJ18. Ethan Cecchetti, Ben Fisch, Ian Miers, and Ari Juels. Pies: Public incom-
pressible encodings for decentralized storage. Cryptology ePrint Archive,
Report 2018/684, 2018. https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/684.
chi17. Chia network. https://chia.network/, 2017.
CHK+16. Jean-S´ ebastien Coron, Thomas Holenstein, Robin K¨ unzler, Jacques
Patarin, Yannick Seurin, and Stefano Tessaro. How to build an ideal cipher:
The indiﬀerentiability of the Feistel construction. Journal of Cryptology ,
29(1):61–114, January 2016.
CKBA08. Reza Curtmola, Osama Khan, Randal Burns, and Giuseppe Ateniese. Mr-
pdp: Multiple-replica provable data possession. In Distributed Computing
Systems, 2008. ICDCS’08. The 28th International Conference on , pages
411–420. IEEE, 2008.
DFKP15. Stefan Dziembowski, Sebastian Faust, Vladimir Kolmogorov, and
Krzysztof Pietrzak. Proofs of space. In Rosario Gennaro and Matthew
J. B. Robshaw, editors, CRYPTO 2015, Part II , volume 9216 of LNCS,
pages 585–605. Springer, Heidelberg, August 2015.
DKT16. Dana Dachman-Soled, Jonathan Katz, and Aishwarya Thiruvengadam. 10-
round Feistel is indiﬀerentiable from an ideal cipher. In Marc Fischlin and
Jean-S´ ebastien Coron, editors,EUROCRYPT 2016, Part II , volume 9666
of LNCS, pages 649–678. Springer, Heidelberg, May 2016.
DORS08. Yevgeniy Dodis, Rafail Ostrovsky, Leonid Reyzin, and Adam Smith. Fuzzy
extractors: How to generate strong keys from biometrics and other noisy
data. SIAM journal on computing , 38(1):97–139, 2008.
DS16. Yuanxi Dai and John P. Steinberger. Indiﬀerentiability of 8-round
Feistel networks. In Matthew Robshaw and Jonathan Katz, editors,
CRYPTO 2016, Part I , volume 9814 of LNCS, pages 95–120. Springer,
Heidelberg, August 2016.
DVW09. Yevgeniy Dodis, Salil P. Vadhan, and Daniel Wichs. Proofs of retrievability
via hardness ampliﬁcation. In Omer Reingold, editor, TCC 2009 , volume
5444 of LNCS, pages 109–127. Springer, Heidelberg, March 2009.
EK13. Mohammad Etemad and Alptekin K¨ up¸ c¨ u. Transparent, distributed, and
replicated dynamic provable data possession. In Michael J. Jacobson Jr.,
Michael E. Locasto, Payman Mohassel, and Reihaneh Safavi-Naini, editors,
ACNS 13 , volume 7954 of LNCS, pages 1–18. Springer, Heidelberg, June
2013.
FBBG18. Ben Fisch, Joseph Bonneau, Juan Benet, and Nicola Greco. Proofs of
replication using depth robust graphs, 2018. https://cyber.stanford.
edu/bpase18.
Fis18. Ben Fisch. Tight proofs of space and replication. Cryptology ePrint
Archive, Report 2018/702, 2018. https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/702.
25
HY10. Zhuo Hao and Nenghai Yu. A multiple-replica remote data possession
checking protocol with public veriﬁability. In Data, Privacy and E-
Commerce (ISDPE), 2010 Second International Symposium on , pages 84–
89. IEEE, 2010.
JK07. Ari Juels and Burton S. Kaliski Jr. Pors: proofs of retrievability for large
ﬁles. In Peng Ning, Sabrina De Capitani di Vimercati, and Paul F. Syver-
son, editors, ACM CCS 2007 , pages 584–597. ACM Press, October 2007.
Lab17a. Protocol Labs. Filecoin: A decentralized storage network. https://
filecoin.io/filecoin.pdf, 2017.
Lab17b. Protocol Labs. Proof of replication. https://filecoin.io/
proof-of-replication.pdf, 2017.
MRH04. Ueli M. Maurer, Renato Renner, and Clemens Holenstein. Indiﬀerentia-
bility, impossibility results on reductions, and applications to the random
oracle methodology. In Moni Naor, editor, TCC 2004 , volume 2951 of
LNCS, pages 21–39. Springer, Heidelberg, February 2004.
Pie18. Krzysztof Pietrzak. Proofs of catalytic space. Cryptology ePrint Archive,
Report 2018/194, 2018. https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/194.
PPK+15. Sunoo Park, Krzysztof Pietrzak, Albert Kwon, Jo¨ el Alwen, Georg Fuchs-
bauer, and Peter Gaˇ zi. Spacemint: A cryptocurrency based on proofs
of space. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2015/528, 2015. http:
//eprint.iacr.org/2015/528.
RD16. Ling Ren and Srinivas Devadas. Proof of space from stacked expanders.
In Martin Hirt and Adam D. Smith, editors, TCC 2016-B, Part I , volume
9985 of LNCS, pages 262–285. Springer, Heidelberg, October / November
2016.
RSS11. Thomas Ristenpart, Hovav Shacham, and Thomas Shrimpton. Careful
with composition: Limitations of the indiﬀerentiability framework. In Ken-
neth G. Paterson, editor,EUROCRYPT 2011, volume 6632 ofLNCS, pages
487–506. Springer, Heidelberg, May 2011.
SW08. Hovav Shacham and Brent Waters. Compact proofs of retrievability. In
Josef Pieprzyk, editor, ASIACRYPT 2008, volume 5350 of LNCS, pages
90–107. Springer, Heidelberg, December 2008.
VDJO+12. Marten Van Dijk, Ari Juels, Alina Oprea, Ronald L Rivest, Emil Stefanov,
and Nikos Triandopoulos. Hourglass schemes: how to prove that cloud ﬁles
are encrypted. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM conference on Computer
and communications security , pages 265–280. ACM, 2012.
26