† © IACR 2020: An extended abstract of this paper appears in the proceedings of IACR CRYPTO 2020, with DOI:
10.1007/978-3-030-56784-2_16. This is the full version.
An earlier version of this document was titled ‘RISE and SHINE: Fast and Secure Updatable Encryption’. This version
subsumes that work and includes new results; we summarize the changes in Section 1.4.
Fast and Secure Updatable Encryption†
Colin Boyd1 Gareth T. Davies2 ID Kristian Gjøsteen1 and Yao Jiang1
1Norwegian University of Science and Technology, NTNU, Norway.
{colin.boyd,kristian.gjosteen,yao.jiang}@ntnu.no
2Bergische Universität Wuppertal, Wuppertal, Germany.
davies@uni-wuppertal.de
February 25, 2022
Abstract
Updatable encryption allows a client to outsource ciphertexts to some untrusted server and periodically
rotate the encryption key. The server can update ciphertexts from an old key to a new key with the help of
an update token, received from the client, which should not reveal anything about plaintexts to an adversary.
We provide a new and highly efﬁcient suite of updatable encryption schemes that we collectively call
SHINE. In the variant designed for short messages, ciphertext generation consists of applying one per-
mutation and one exponentiation (per message block), while updating ciphertexts requires just one expo-
nentiation. Variants for longer messages provide much stronger security guarantees than prior work that
has comparable efﬁciency. We present a new conﬁdentiality notion for updatable encryption schemes that
implies prior notions. We prove that SHINE is secure under our new conﬁdentiality deﬁnition while also
providing ciphertext integrity.
1
Contents
1 Introduction 3
1.1 Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.1.1 Security Models for UE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.1.2 Constructions of Ciphertext-Independent UE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
1.1.3 Related Primitives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
1.2 Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
1.3 Further Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
1.4 Document History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
1.5 Organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2 Preliminaries 8
2.1 Hardness Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.2 Updatable Encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
3 Security Models for Updatable Encryption 10
3.1 Existing Deﬁnitions of Conﬁdentiality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2 Trivial Win Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2.1 Trivial Win Conditions in Conﬁdentiality Games . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2.2 Trivial Win Conditions in Ciphertext Integrity Games . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3 Firewall Technique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3.1 Example of Epoch Corruption and Trivial Wins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4 On the Security of Updates 18
4.1 A New Deﬁnition of Conﬁdentiality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.2 Relations among Security Notions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2.1 Relations between IND-UE and IND-UE∗ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2.2 Relations among IND-ENC, IND-UPD, and IND-UE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2.3 Relation among CPA, CTXT and CCA Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5 The SHINE Schemes 31
5.1 Construction of SHINE Schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.1.1 SHINE via Zero Block: SHINE0. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.1.2 SHINE via Double Encryption: MirrorSHINE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.1.3 SHINE for Long Messages via Checksum: OCBSHINE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.2 Security - SHINE is detIND-UE-CPA, INT-CTXT, detIND-UE-CCA Secure . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.3 Proof Challenges in Schemes with Deterministic Updates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.4 SHINE is detIND-UE-CPA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.5 SHINE is INT-CTXTs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.6 Implementing the SHINE Schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6 Conclusions 45
A SHINE0 is IND-ENC -CPA Secure 48
B The BLMR Scheme of Boneh, Lewi, Montgomery, and Raghunathan 50
B.1 BLMR+ is weakIND-UE-CPA Secure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
C The RISE Scheme of Lehmann and Tackmann 56
C.1 RISE is randIND-UE-CPA Secure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
2
1 Introduction
The past decades have demonstrated clearly that key compromise is a real threat for deployed systems. The
standard technique for mitigating key compromise is to regularly rotate the encryption keys – generate new
ones and switch the ciphertexts to encryption under the new keys. Key rotation is a well-established technique
in applications such as payment cards [Cou18] and cloud storage [KRS+03].
For a local drive or server, key rotation is feasible by decrypting and re-encrypting with a new key, since
symmetric encryption operations are fast and parallelizable and bandwidth is often plentiful. When ciphertext
storage has been outsourced to some (untrusted) cloud storage provider, bandwidth is often considerably more
expensive than computation, and even for small volumes of data it may be prohibitively expensive to download,
re-encrypt and upload the entire database even once. This means that key rotation by downloading, decrypting,
re-encrypting and reuploading is practically infeasible.
An alternative approach to solving this problem is to useupdatable encryption (UE), ﬁrst deﬁned by Boneh
et al. [BLMR13] (henceforth BLMR). The user computes a token and sends it to the storage server. The token
allows the server to update the ciphertexts so that they become encryptions under some new key. Although the
token clearly depends on both the old and new encryption keys, knowledge of the token alone should not allow
the server to obtain either key. In a typical usage of UE, the cloud storage provider will receive a new token on
a periodic basis, and the provider then updates every stored ciphertext. The time period for which a given key
is valid for is called an epoch.
In the past few years there has been considerable interest in extending the understanding of UE. A series of
prominent papers [BLMR13, EPRS17a, LT18a, KLR19a] have provided both new (typically stronger) security
deﬁnitions and concrete or generic constructions to meet their deﬁnitions. (We make a detailed comparison
of related work in Section 1.1.1 next.) An important distinction between earlier schemes is whether or not
the token (and in particular its size) depends on the ciphertexts to be updated (and in particular the number
of ciphertexts). Schemes for which a token is assigned to each ciphertext are ciphertext-dependent and were
studied by Everspaugh et al. [EPRS17a] (henceforth EPRS). If the token is independent of the ciphertexts to be
updated, such as in BLMR [BLMR15], we have a ciphertext-independent1 scheme. A clear and important goal
is to limit the bandwidth required and so, in general, one should prefer ciphertext-independent schemes. Thus,
as with the most recent work [LT18a, KLR19a], we focus on such schemes in this paper. The ciphertext update
procedure, performed by the server, may bedeterministic or randomized – note that in the latter case the server
is burdened with producing (good) randomness and using it correctly.
Despite the considerable advances of the past few years, there remain some important open questions re-
garding basic properties of UE. In terms of security, various features have been added to protect against stronger
adversaries. Yet it is not obvious what are the realistic and optimal security goals of UE and whether they have
been achieved. In terms of efﬁciency, we only have a few concrete schemes to compare. As may be expected,
schemes with stronger security are generally more expensive but it remains unclear whether this cost is neces-
sary. In this paper we make contributions to both of these fundamental questions by deﬁningnew and stronger
security properties and showing that these can be achieved with more efﬁcient concrete UE schemes.
Security. The main security properties that one would expect from updatable encryption are by now well
studied; however the breadth of information that is possible to protect in this context is more subtle than at ﬁrst
glance. Consider, for example, a journalist who stores a contact list with a cloud storage provider. At some
point, the storage is compromised and an adversary recovers the ciphertexts. At this point, it may be important
that the cryptography does not reveal which of the contacts are recent, and which are old. That is, it must be
hard to decide if some ciphertext was recently created, or if it has been updated from a ciphertext stored in an
earlier epoch.
So how do we deﬁne realistic adversaries in this environment? A natural ﬁrst step for security in updatable
encryption is conﬁdentiality of ciphertexts – given a single ciphertext, the adversarial server should not be able
to determine anything about the underlying plaintext. The security model here must take into account that this
adversary could be in possession of a number of prior keys or update tokens, and snapshot access to the storage
1Note that Boneh et al. [[BLMR15], § Deﬁnition 7.6] use ciphertext-independence to mean that the updated ciphertext should have
the same distribution as a fresh ciphertext (i.e. independent of the ciphertext in the previous epoch) – we follow the nomenclature of
Lehmann and Tackmann [LT18a].
3
database in different epochs. The next step is to consider unlinkability between different epochs arising from
the ciphertext update procedure: given a ciphertext for the current epoch, the adversary should not be able to
tell which ciphertext (that existed in the previous epoch) a current ciphertext was updated from. Both of these
properties can be naturally extended to chosen-ciphertext (CCA) security via provision of a decryption oracle.
These steps have been taken by prior work, but unfortunately even a combination of these properties is
not enough to defend against our motivating example. Previous security deﬁnitions cannot guarantee that the
adversary is unable to distinguish between a ciphertext new in the current epoch and an updated ciphertext
from an earlier epoch. We give a single new security property that captures this requirement and implies the
notions given in prior work. Therefore we believe that this deﬁnition isthe natural conﬁdentiality property that
is required for updatable encryption.
An additional factor to consider is integrity: the user should be conﬁdent that their ciphertexts have not
been modiﬁed by the adversarial server. While prior work has shown how to deﬁne and achieve integrity
in the context of updatable encryption, a composition result of the style given by Bellare and Namprempre
for symmetric encryption [BN08] – the combination of CPA security and integrity of ciphertexts gives CCA
security – has been missing. We close this gap.
Efﬁciency and Functionality. Although UE is by deﬁnition a form of symmetric key cryptography, tech-
niques from asymmetric cryptography appear to be needed to achieve the required functionality in a sensible
fashion. All of the previous known schemes with security proofs use exponentiation in both the encryption
and update functions, even for those with limited security properties. Since a modern database may contain
large numbers of ﬁles, efﬁciency is critical both for clients who will have to encrypt plaintexts initially and for
servers who will have to update ciphertexts for all of their users.
To bridge the gap between the academic literature and deployments of encrypted outsourced storage, it is
crucial to design fast schemes . We present three novel UE schemes that not only satisfy our strong security
deﬁnitions (CCA and ciphertext integrity), but in the vast majority of application scenarios are also at least
twice as fast (in terms of computation each message block) as any previous scheme with comparable security
level.
The ciphertext expansion of a scheme says how much the size of a ciphertext grows compared to the size
of the message. For a cloud server that stores vast numbers of ﬁles, it is naturally crucial to minimize the
ciphertext expansion rate. It is also desirable to construct UE schemes that can encrypt arbitrarily large ﬁles,
since a client might want to upload media ﬁles such as images or videos. Prior schemes that have achieved
these two properties have only been secure in comparatively weak models. Our construction suitable for long
messages – enabling encryption of arbitrarily large ﬁles with almost no ciphertext expansion – is secure in our
strong sense and is thus the ﬁrst to bridge this gap.
1.1 Related Work
1.1.1 Security Models for UE.
We regard the sequential, epoch-based corruption model of Lehmann and Tackmann [LT18a] (LT18) as the
most suitable execution environment to capture the threats in updatable encryption. In this model, the adversary
advances to the next epoch via an oracle query. It can choose to submit its (single) challenge when it pleases,
and it can later update the challenge ciphertext to the ‘current’ epoch. Further, the adversary is allowed to
adaptively corrupt epoch (i.e. ﬁle encryption) keys and update tokens at any point in the game: only at the end
of the adversary’s execution does the challenger determine whether a trivial win has been made possible by
some combination of the corruption queries and the challenge.
LT18 introduced two notions: IND-ENC asks the adversary to submit two plaintexts and distinguish the
resulting ciphertext, while possibly having corrupted tokens (but of course not keys) linking this challenge
ciphertext to prior or later epochs. Further, they introduced IND-UPD: the adversary provides two ciphertexts
that it received via regular encryption-oracle queries in the previous epoch, and has to work out which one
has been updated. They observed 2 that plaintext information can be leaked not only through the encryption
2The proceedings and full versions of LT18 stated that “IND-ENC security cannot guarantee anything about the security of updates.
In fact, a scheme where the update algorithm UE.Upd includes all the old ciphertexts C0, ... , Ce in the updated ciphertext Ce+1 could
be considered IND-ENC secure, but clearly lose all security if a single old key gets compromised. ” This line of argument is ﬂawed,
4
procedure, but also via updates. For schemes with deterministic updates, the adversary would trivially win if it
could acquire the update token that takes the adversarially-provided ciphertexts into the challenge epoch, hence
the deﬁnition for this setting, named detIND-UPD, is different from that for the randomized setting, named
randIND-UPD.
LT18’sIND-UPD deﬁnition was not the ﬁrst approach to formalizing the desirable property of unlinkabil-
ity of ciphertexts, which attempts to specify that given two already-updated ciphertexts, the adversary cannot
tell if the plaintext is the same. Indeed EPRS ( UP-REENC) and later KLR19 ( UP-REENC-CCA) also con-
sidered this problem, in the ciphertext-dependent update and CCA-secure setting respectively. The work of
KLR19 [[KLR19a], § Appendix A] stated that “an even stronger notion [than IND-UPD] might be desirable:
namely that fresh and re-encrypted ciphertexts are indistinguishable... which is not guaranteed byUP-REENC”
– we will answer this open question later on in our paper.
In the full version of their work [BLMR15], BLMR introduced a security deﬁnition for UE denotedupdate
– an extension of a model of symmetric proxy re-encryption. This non-sequential deﬁnition is considerably less
adaptive than the later work of LT18, since the adversary’s key/token corruption queries and ciphertext update
queries are very limited. Further, they only considered schemes with deterministic update algorithms.
EPRS [EPRS17a] provided (non-sequential) deﬁnitions for updatable authenticated encryption, in the ciphertext-
dependent setting. Their work (inherently) covered CCA security and ciphertext integrity (CTXT). These deﬁ-
nitions were ambiguous regarding adaptivity: these issues have since been ﬁxed in the full version [EPRS17b].
KLR19 attempted to provide stronger security guarantees for ciphertext-independent UE than LT18, con-
centrating on chosen-ciphertext security (and the weaker replayable CCA) in addition to integrity of plaintexts
and ciphertexts. We revisit these deﬁnitions later on, and show how a small modiﬁcation to their INT-CTXT
game gives rise to natural composition results.
In practice, LT18’srandIND-UPD deﬁnition insists that the ciphertext update procedure Upd requires the
server to generate randomness for updating each ciphertext. Further, a scheme meeting both IND-ENC and
IND-UPD can still leak the epoch in which the ﬁle was uploaded (the ‘age’ of the ciphertext). While it is
arguable that metadata is inherent in outsourced storage, the use of updatable encryption is for high-security
applications, and it would not be infeasible to design a system that does not reveal meta-data, which is clearly
impossible if the underlying cryptosystem reveals the meta-data.
Recent work by Jarecki et al. [JKR19] considers the key wrapping entity as a separate entity from the data
owner or the storage server. While this approach seems promising, their security model is considerably weaker
than those considered in our work or the papers already mentioned in this section: the adversary must choose
whether to corrupt the key management server (and get the epoch key) or the storage server (and get the update
token) for each epoch, and thus it cannot dynamically corrupt earlier keys or tokens at a later stage.
1.1.2 Constructions of Ciphertext-Independent UE
The initial description of updatable encryption by Boneh et al. [BLMR13] was motivated by providing a
symmetric-key version of proxy re-encryption (see below). BLMR imagined doing this in a symmetric manner,
where each epoch is simply one period in which re-encryption (rotation) has occurred. Their resulting scheme,
denoted BLMR, deploys a key-homomorphic PRF, yet the nonce attached to a ciphertext ensures thatIND-UPD
cannot be met (the scheme pre-dates the IND-UPD notion).
The symmetric-Elgamal-based scheme of LT18, named RISE, uses a randomized update algorithm and is
proven to meet IND-ENC and randIND-UPD under DDH. These proofs entail a seemingly unavoidable loss –
a cubic term in the total number of epochs – our results also have this factor. LT18 also presented an extended
version of the scheme by BLMR, denotedBLMR+, where the nonce is encrypted: they showed that this scheme
meets a weak version ofIND-UPD called weakIND-UPD, in which if the adversary corrupts the token that links
the challenge epoch to the epoch immediately after then a trivial win condition is triggered.
The aim of KLR19 was to achieve stronger security than BLMR, EPRS and LT18 in the ciphertext-
independent setting: in particular CCA security and integrity protection. They observed that the structure
of RISE ensures that ciphertext integrity cannot be achieved: access to just one update token allows the storage
and in fact IND-ENC rules out schemes of this form: encryptions were always fresh at some point. This claim was corrected and
clariﬁed in a June 2019 presentation by the ﬁrst author [Leh19], and further elaborated on in an update to the full version in December
2019 [LT18b].
5
provider to construct ciphertexts of messages of its choice. Their generic constructions, based on encrypt-and-
MAC and the Naor-Yung paradigm, are strictly less efﬁcient thanRISE. We show how to achieve CCA security
and integrity protections with novel schemes that are comparably efﬁcient with RISE.
1.1.3 Related Primitives
Proxy re-encryption (PRE) allows a ciphertext that is decryptable by some secret key to be re-encrypted such
that it can be decrypted by some other key. Security models for PRE are closer to those for encryption than
the strictly sequential outsourced-storage-centric models for UE, and as observed by Lehmann and Tack-
mann [LT18a] the concepts of allowable corruptions and trivial wins for UE need considerable care when
translating to the (more general) PRE setting. Unlinkability is not necessarily desired in PRE – updating the
entire ciphertext may not be essential for a PRE scheme to be deemed secure – thus even after conversion to the
symmetric setting, prior schemes [AFGH05, CH07] cannot meet the indistinguishability requirements that we
ask of UE schemes. Recent works by Lee [Lee17] and Davidson et al. [DDLM19] have highlighted the links
between the work of BLMR and EPRS and PRE, and in particular the second work gives a public-key variant
of the (sequential) IND-UPD deﬁnition of LT18. Myers and Shull [MS18] presented security models for hybrid
proxy re-encryption, and gave a single-challenge version of theUP-IND notion of EPRS. While the models are
subtly different, the techniques for achieving secure UE and PRE are often similar: in particular rotating keys
via exponentiation to some simple function of old and new key ( RISE is essentially a combination of Blaze et
al.’s symmetric version of ElGamal [BBS98] and ciphertext randomization). Further, the symmetric-key PRE
scheme of Sakurai et al. [SNS17] is at a high level similar to SHINE (their all-or-nothing-transform as an inner
layer essentially serves the same purpose as the ideal cipher in SHINE), but in a security model that does not
allow dynamic corruptions. Their approach includes – this natural approach is somewhat similar to the schemes
that we introduce later in the paper.
Tokenization schemes aim to protect short secrets, such as credit card numbers, using deterministic encryp-
tion and deterministic updates: this line of work reﬂects the PCI DSS standard [Cou18] for the payment card
industry. Provable security of such schemes was initially explored by Diaz-Santiago et al. [DRC14] and ex-
tended to the updatable setting by Cachin et al. [CCFL17]. While much of the formalism in the model of Cachin
et al. has been used in recent works on UE (in particular the epoch-based corruption model), the requirements
on ciphertext indistinguishability are stronger in the UE setting, where we expect probabilistic encryption of
(potentially large) ﬁles.
1.2 Contributions
Our ﬁrst major contribution is deﬁning thexxIND-UE-atk security notion for updatable encryption, for(xx, atk)∈
{(det, CPA), (rand, CPA), (det, CCA)}, and comprehensively analyzing its relation to other, existing3 security
notions (xxIND-ENC-atk, xxIND-UPD-atk). Our single deﬁnition requires that ciphertexts output by the en-
cryption algorithm are indistinguishable from ciphertexts output by the update algorithm. We show that our new
notion is strictly stronger even than combinations of prior notions, both in the randomized- and deterministic-
update settings under chosen-plaintext attack and chosen-ciphertext attack. This not only gives us the unlinka-
bility desired by prior works, but also answers the open question posed by KLR19 mentioned on page 5. Fig. 18
describes the relationship between our new notion xxIND-UE-atk and prior notions.
After a slight tweak to KLR19’s deﬁnitions for CTXT and CCA, we show the following generic composi-
tion result: detIND-yy-CPA + INT-CTXT ⇒ detIND-yy-CCA for yy∈{ UE, ENC, UPD}. Combining this
result with the relations from detIND-UE-atk above, we thus show that the combination of detIND-UE-CPA
and INT-CTXT yields detIND-yy-CCA for all yy∈{ UE, ENC, UPD}.
Our second major contribution is in designing a new, fast updatable encryption schemeSHINE. Our scheme
is based on a random-looking permutation combined with the exponentiation map in a cyclic group, and comes
in a number of variants: SHINE0, MirrorSHINE and OCBSHINE, for small messages, medium-sized messages
and arbitrarily large messages respectively. In Fig. 1, we provide a comparison of security, ciphertext expansion
and efﬁciency between our new schemes and those from prior literature. We also further the understanding of
3The notions IND-ENC, randIND-UPD and detIND-UPD (which we denote as IND-ENC-CPA, randIND-UPD-CPA and
detIND-UPD-CPA, resp.) are from LT18. The notions UP-IND-CCA and UP-REENC-CCA (detIND-ENC-CCA and
detIND-UPD-CCA, resp.) are from KLR19. LT18 and KLR19 both build upon the deﬁnitions given by EPRS.
6
IND INT |M| | C| Enc (Upd)
BLMR [BLMR13] (det, ENC, CPA)  l|G| (l+1)|G| lE
BLMR+ [BLMR13, LT18a] (weak, UE, CPA)  l|G| (l+1)|G| lE
RISE [LT18a] (rand, UE, CPA)  1|G| 2|G| 2E
SHINE0[CPA] § 5.1.1 (det, UE, CPA)  (1-γ)|G| 1|G| 1E
NYUE [KLR19a] (rand, ENC, RCCA)
(rand, UPD, RCCA)  1|G1| (34|G1|, 34|G2|) (60E,70E)
NYUAE [KLR19a] (rand, ENC, RCCA)
(rand, UPD, RCCA) PTXT 1|G1| (58|G1|, 44|G2|) (110E,90E)
E&M [KLR19a] (det, ENC, CCA)
(det, UPD, CCA) CTXT 1|G| 3|G| 3E
SHINE0 § 5.1.1 (det, UE, CCA) CTXT (1-2γ)|G| 1|G| 1E
MirrorSHINE § 5.1.2 (det, UE, CCA) CTXT (1-γ)|G| 2|G| 2E
OCBSHINE § 5.1.3 (det, UE, CCA) CTXT l|G| (l+2)|G| (l+2)E
Figure 1: Comparison of security, ciphertext expansion and efﬁciency for updatable encryption schemes.
(xx, yy, atk) represents the best possible xxIND-yy-atk notion that each scheme can achieve. E represents
the cost of an exponentiation, for encryption Enc and ciphertext update Upd. γ represents the bit-size of the
used nonce as a proportion of the group element bit-size. ForNYUE and NYUAE, size/cost is in pairing groups
G1, G2. SHINE0[CPA] is SHINE0 with a zero-length integrity tag. BLMR, BLMR+ and OCBSHINE support
encryption of arbitrary size messages (ofl blocks), with|M|≈ l|G|.
schemes with deterministic update mechanisms. In particular, we identify the properties that are necessary of
such schemes to meet a generalized version of our detIND-UE-atk notion. Another important contribution is
that we further improve on the existing epoch insulation techniques that have been used to create proofs of
security in the strong corruption environment we pursue. These have been shown to be very useful for studying
updatable encryption schemes, and we expect our new techniques to be useful in the future.
1.3 Further Discussion
We have had to make a number of practical design decisions for our new UE scheme SHINE. The main idea
is to permute the (combination of nonce and) message and then exponentiate the resulting value, with different
mechanisms for enforcing ciphertext integrity depending on the ﬂavor that is being used (which is in turn
deﬁned by the desired message length). In this subsection we give some motivation for why we believe that
these choices are reasonable.
Deterministic updates. Since we will require indistinguishability of ciphertexts, we know that the UE en-
cryption algorithm should be randomized. The update algorithm may or may not be randomized, however. All
known schemes indicate that randomized updates are more expensive than deterministic updates, but there is a
small, well-understood security loss in moving to deterministic updates: an adversary with an update token in
an appropriate epoch can trivially distinguish between an update of a known ciphertext and other ciphertexts
in the next epoch. As a result, in the detIND-UE-CPA case the adversary is only forbidden from obtaining
one token compared to randIND-UE-CPA. Furthermore, UE schemes with randomized updates cannot achieve
CTXT and CCA security, which is possible for the deterministic-update setting. We believe that the minor CPA
security loss is a small price to pay for stronger security (CTXT and CCA) and efﬁciency gain, in particular to
reduce computations in the UE encryption and update algorithms and also improve ciphertext expansion.
Bi-directional key updates. In principle, the token used to update ciphertexts need not be sufﬁcient to derive
the new key from the old key. But for every known practical scheme, this derivation is indeed easy. Moreover,
for every known practical scheme including ours, the old key can be derived from the new key (and token).
While uni-directional update algorithms are desirable, constructing efﬁcient protocols has so far been elusive:
this has technical implications for how security notions are deﬁned.
7
Limited number of epochs. In many applications that we would like to consider, the user of the storage
service will control when updates occur (perhaps when an employee with access to key material leaves the
organisation, or if an employee loses a key-holding device): this indicates that the total number of key rotations
in the lifetime of a storage system might be numbered in the thousands, and in particular could be considerably
smaller than the number of outsourced ﬁles.
1.4 Document History
This is the fourth version of this document. The ﬁrst version 4 contained two versions of SHINE that were
only detIND-UE-CPA secure, with one ﬂavor for long messages and the other for short messages. The second
version5 introduced a number of technical changes, including: three new schemes that all meet the stronger no-
tion of detIND-UE-CCA security via differing integrity mechanisms; the composition result in Theorem 3; the
formulation of INT-CTXT (a tweak of that given by KLR19), plus the description of the relationship between
possible integrity notions (Lemma 1 and Remark 1). The third 6 and fourth versions are more incremental.
Version 3 incorporated a discussion of implementation of SHINE in Section 5.6, and this version ﬁxes the
counterexample used in Theorem 2.7 and adds an explicit length check to queries in the IND-UE game.
1.5 Organization
After introducing syntax and preliminaries in Section 2, we detail the necessary formalism for security modeling
in updatable encryption in Section 3. In Section 4 we deﬁne our new conﬁdentiality property IND-UE and
show how it implies prior notions; in Section 5 we give our new scheme, SHINE, including intuition behind
its security analysis and implementation options. We show the security properties that can be met, in our new
framework, by prior work schemes BLMR and RISE (LT18) in Section B and C respectively.
2 Preliminaries
Pseudocode returnb′ ?=b is used as shorthand forif b′ =b then return 1 // else return 0, with an output
of 1 indicating adversarial success. We use the concrete security framework, deﬁning adversarial advantage as
probability of success in the security game, and avoid statements of security with respect to security notions. In
the cases where we wish to indicate that notion A implies notion B (for some ﬁxed primitive), i.e. an adversary’s
advantage against B carries over to an advantage against A, we show this by bounding these probabilities.
2.1 Hardness Assumptions
For the deﬁnition of DDH, CDH and later on, we assume the existence of a group-generation algorithm that is
parameterized byλ and outputs a cyclic group G of orderq (whereq is of lengthλ bits) and a generatorg. We
adapt the deﬁnition of pseudorandom functions from Boneh et al. [BLMR13].
Deﬁnition 1 (DDH). Fix a cyclic group G of prime orderq with generatorg. The advantage of an algorithmA
solving the Decision Difﬁe-Hellman (DDH) problem for G andg is
AdvDDH
G,A(λ) =
⏐⏐⏐Pr[ExpDDH-1
G,A (λ) = 1]− Pr[ExpDDH-0
G,A (λ) = 1]
⏐⏐⏐
where the experiment ExpDDH-b
G,A is given in Fig. 2.
Deﬁnition 2 (CDH). Fix a cyclic group G of prime orderq with generatorg. The advantage of an algorithmA
solving the Computational Difﬁe-Hellman (CDH) problem for G andg is
AdvCDH
G,A (λ) = Pr[ExpCDH
G,A(λ) = 1]
where the experiment ExpCDH
G,A is given in Fig. 3.
4https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/1457/20191218:195141, 17th December 2019
5https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/1457/20200221:133540, 21st February 2020
6https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/1457/20200729:120307, 29th July 2020
8
ExpDDH-b
G,A (λ)
1 : x,y,r
$
← −Zq
2 : X←gx;Y ←gy
3 : if b = 0
4 : Z←gxy
5 : else
6 : Z←gr
7 : b ′←A (g,X,Y,Z )
8 : return b′
Figure 2: DDH experiment ExpDDH-b
G,A
ExpCDH
G,A(λ)
1 : x,y
$
← −Zq
2 : X←gx
3 : Y ←gy
4 : Z←A (g,X,Y )
5 : if Z =gxy
6 : return 1
7 : else
8 : return 0
Figure 3: CDH experiment ExpCDH
G,A
Deﬁnition 3 (PRF). LetF :K×X − →Ybe an efﬁciently computable function, where K is called the key
space,X is the domain, andY is the range. The PRF advantage forA againstF is given by
AdvPRF
F,A(λ) =
⏐⏐⏐Pr[ExpPRF-1
F,A (λ) = 1]− Pr[ExpPRF-0
F,A (λ) = 1]
⏐⏐⏐
where the experiment ExpPRF-b
F,A is given in Fig. 4.
ExpPRF-b
F,A (λ)
1 : if b = 0
2 : k
$
← −K
3 : f(·)←F (k,·)
4 : else
5 : f(·)
$
← −{f :X− →Y}
6 : b ′←AO.f()
7 : return b′
O.f(x)
8 : if x⁄∈X
9 : return⊥
10 : else
11 : returnf(x)
Figure 4: PRF experiment ExpPRF-b
F,A
2.2 Updatable Encryption
We follow the syntax of prior work [KLR19a], deﬁning an Updatable Encryption ( UE) scheme as a tuple of
algorithms{UE.KG, UE.TG, UE.Enc, UE.Dec, UE.Upd} that operate in epochs, these algorithms are described
in Fig. 5. A scheme is deﬁned over some plaintext space MS, ciphertext spaceCS , key spaceKS and token
spaceTS . We specify integer n + 1 as the (total) number of epochs over which a UE scheme can operate,
though this is only for proof purposes. Correctness [KLR19a] is deﬁned as expected: fresh encryptions and
updated ciphertexts should decrypt to the correct message under the appropriate epoch key. In contrast to prior
work, we only consider deterministic token generation algorithms – all schemes in prior literature and our
schemes allow the token to be produced deterministically from epoch keys alone.
In addition to enabling ciphertext updates, in many schemes the token allows ciphertexts to be ‘down-
graded’: performing some analog of the UE.Upd operation on a ciphertext C created in (or updated to) epoch
e yields a valid ciphertext in epoch e-1. Such a scheme is said to have bi-directional ciphertext updates7. Fur-
thermore, for many constructions, the token additionally enables key derivation, given one adjacent key. If
this can be done in both directions – i.e. knowledge of ke and ∆e+1 allows derivation of ke+1 AND knowl-
edge of ke+1 and ∆e+1 allows derivation of ke – then such schemes are referred to by LT18 as having bi-
directional key updates. If such derivation is only possible in one ‘direction’ then the scheme is said to haveuni-
directional key updates. Much of the prior literature on updatable encryption has distinguished these notions:
7For example if the Upd procedure exponentiates all ciphertext components using the token, as done in SHINE, then Upd itself is
sufﬁcient to demonstrate this property.
9
Algorithm Rand/Det Input Output Syntax
UE.KG Key Gen Rand λ ke ke
$← −UE.KG(λ)
UE.TG Token Gen Det ke, ke+1 ∆e+1 ∆e+1← UE.TG(ke, ke+1)
UE.Enc Encryption Rand M, ke Ce Ce
$← −UE.Enc(ke, M)
UE.Dec Decryption Det Ce, ke M′ or⊥ {M′/⊥}← UE.Dec(ke, Ce)
UE.Upd Update Ctxt Rand/det Ce, ∆e+1 Ce+1 Ce+1
$← −UE.Upd(∆e+1, Ce)
Figure 5: Syntax of algorithms deﬁning an Updatable Encryption scheme UE.
we stress that all schemes and deﬁnitions of security considered in this paper have bi-directional key updates
and bi-directional ciphertext updates.
3 Security Models for Updatable Encryption
We consider a number of indistinguishability-based conﬁdentiality games and integrity games for assessing
security of updatable encryption schemes. The environment provided by the challenger attempts to give as
much power as possible to adversary A. The adversary may call for a number of oracles, and after A has
ﬁnished running the challenger computes whether or not any of the actions enabled a trivial win. The available
oracles are described in Fig. 6. An overview of the oraclesA has access to in each security game is provided in
Fig. 7.
Setup(λ)
1 : k 0← UE.KG(λ)
2 : ∆ 0←⊥
3 : e, c← 0
4 : phase, twf← 0
5 : L, ˜L,C,K,T ←∅
O.Enc(M)
6 : C ← UE.Enc(ke, M)
7 : c← c + 1
8 : L←L∪{ (c, C, e)}
9 : return C
O.Dec(C)
10 : twf← 1 if
11 : phase = 1 and C∈ ˜L
12 : M ′ or⊥← UE.Dec(ke, C)
13 : return M′ or⊥
O.Next()
14 : e← e + 1
15 : k e
$
← −UE.KG(λ)
16 : ∆ e
$
← −UE.TG(ke-1, ke)
17 : if phase = 1
18 : ˜Ce← UE.Upd(∆e, ˜Ce-1)
O.Upd(Ce−1)
19 : if (j, Ce−1, e− 1) /∈L
20 : return ⊥
21 : C e← UE.Upd(∆e, Ce−1)
22 : L←L∪{ (j, Ce, e)}
23 : return Ce
O.Corr(inp, ˆe)
24 : if ˆe> e
25 : return ⊥
26 : if inp = key
27 : K←K∪{ ˆe}
28 : return kˆe
29 : if inp = token
30 : T ←T ∪{ˆe}
31 : return ∆ˆe
O.Upd ˜C
32 : C←C∪{ e}
33 : ˜L← ˜L∪{ (˜Ce, e)}
34 : return ˜Ce
O.Try(˜C)
35 : if phase = 1
36 : return⊥
37 : phase← 1
38 : twf← 1 if
39 : e∈K∗ or ˜C∈L∗
40 : M ′ or⊥← UE.Dec(ke, ˜C)
41 : if M′⁄=⊥
42 : win← 1
Figure 6: Oracles in security games for updatable encryption. The boxed lines in O.Try only apply to
INT-CTXTs: in this game the adversary is allowed to query the O.Try oracle only once. Computing ˜L∗ is
discussed in Section 3.2.
10
Notion O.Enc O.Dec O.Next O.Upd O.Corr O.Upd ˜C O.Try
detIND-yy-CPA ✓ × ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ×
randIND-yy-CPA ✓ × ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ×
detIND-yy-CCA ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ×
INT-CTXT ✓ × ✓ ✓ ✓ × ✓
Figure 7: Oracles the adversary is allowed to query in different security games, where yy∈{ ENC, UPD, UE}.
× indicates the adversary does not have access to the corresponding oracle,✓ indicates the adversary has access
to the corresponding oracle.
Conﬁdentiality. A generic representation of all conﬁdentiality games described in this paper is detailed in
Fig. 8. The current epoch is advanced by an adversarial call toO.Next – simulating UE.KG and UE.TG – and
keys and tokens (for the current or any prior epoch) can be corrupted via O.Corr. The adversary can encrypt
arbitrary messages viaO.Enc, and update these ‘non-challenge’ ciphertexts viaO.Upd. In CCA games, the
adversary can additionally call decryption oracleO.Dec (with some natural restrictions to prevent trivial wins).
At some point A makes its challenge by providing two inputs, and receives the challenge ciphertext – and
in later epochs can receive an updated version by calling O.Upd ˜C (computing this value is actually done by
O.Next, a call toO.Upd ˜C returns it).A can then interact with its other oracles again, and eventually outputs
its guess bit. The ﬂag phase tracks whether or not A has made its challenge, and we always give the epoch
in which the challenge happens a special identiﬁer ˜e. If A makes any action that would lead to a trivial win,
the ﬂag twf is set as 1 andA’s output is discarded and replaced by a random bit. We follow the bookkeeping
techniques of LT18 and KLR19, using the following sets to track ciphertexts and their updates that can be
known to the adversary.
•L: List of non-challenge ciphertexts (fromO.Enc orO.Upd) with entries of form (c, C, e), where query
identiﬁer c is a counter incremented with each newO.Enc query.
• ˜L: List of updated versions of challenge ciphertext (created via O.Next, received by adversary via
O.Upd ˜C), with entries of form (˜C, e).
Further, we use the following lists that track epochs only.
•C: List of epochs in which adversary learned updated version of challenge ciphertext (via CHALL or
O.Upd ˜C).
•K: List of epochs in which the adversary corrupted the encryption key.
•T : List of epochs in which the adversary corrupted the update token.
All experiments necessarily maintain some state, but we omit this for readability reasons. The challenger’s
state is S←{L, ˜L,C,K,T} , and the system state in the current epoch is given by st← (ke, ∆e, S, e).
An at-a-glance overview of CHALL for various security deﬁnitions is given in Fig. 9. For security games
such as LT18’s IND-UPD notion, where the adversary must submit as its challenge two ciphertexts (that it
received fromO.Enc) and one is updated, the game must also track in which epochs the adversary has updates
of these ciphertexts. We will later specify a version of our new xxIND-UE-atk notion that allows the adversary
to submit a ciphertext that existed in any epoch prior to the challenge epoch, not just the one immediately
before: this introduces some additional bookkeeping (discussed further in Section 3.2).
CHALL Output of “ Create ˜C with CHALL” (in ˜e)
xxIND-ENC-atk ¯M0, ¯M1 UE.Enc(k˜e, ¯M0) or UE.Enc(k˜e, ¯M1)
xxIND-UPD-atk ¯C0, ¯C1 UE.Upd(∆˜e, ¯C0) or UE.Upd(∆˜e, ¯C1)
xxIND-UE-atk ¯M, ¯C UE.Enc(k˜e, ¯M) or UE.Upd(∆˜e, ¯C)
Figure 9: Intuitive description of challenge inputs and outputs in conﬁdentiality games for updatable encryption
schemes, for (xx, atk)∈{ (det, CPA), (rand, CPA), (det, CCA)}. Full deﬁnitions are given in Section 3.1 and
4.1.
11
ExpxxIND-yy-atk-b
UE,A (λ)
1 : do Setup
2 : CHALL←AO.Enc,(O.Dec),O.Next,O.Upd,O.Corr(λ)
3 : phase← 1; ˜e← e
4 : Create ˜C with CHALL; ˜L← ˜L∪{ (˜Ce, e)}
5 : b ′←AO.Enc,(O.Dec),O.Next,O.Upd,O.Corr,O.Upd˜C(˜C)
6 : twf← 1 if
7 : K∗∩C∗⁄=∅ or
8 : xx = det and I∗∩C∗⁄=∅
9 : if twf = 1
10 : b ′ $
← −{0, 1}
11 : return b′
Figure 8: Generic description of conﬁdentiality experiment ExpxxIND-yy-atk-b
UE,A for scheme UE and adversary
A, for xx∈{ det, rand}, yy∈{ ENC, UPD, UE} and atk∈{ CPA, CCA}. We do not consider (and thus do
not formally deﬁne) randIND-yy-CCA; only in detIND-yy-CCA games doesA have access toO.Dec. CHALL
is the challenge input provided byA: how to perform Create ˜C with CHALL is shown in Fig. 11, Fig. 12 and
Fig. 17. Trivial win conditions, i.e. deciding the value of twf and computingK∗,C∗,I∗, are discussed in
Section 3.2.
A note on nomenclature: the adversary can make its challenge query to receive the challenge ciphertext,
and then acquire updates of the challenge ciphertext via calls to O.Upd ˜C, and additionally it can calculate
challenge-equal ciphertexts via applying tokens it gets viaO.Corr queries.
When appropriate, we will restrict our experiments to provide deﬁnitions of security that are more suitable
for assessing schemes with deterministic update mechanisms. For such schemes, access to the update token
for the challenge epoch ( ∆˜e) allows the adversary to trivially win detIND-UPD-atk and detIND-UE-atk for
atk∈{ CPA, CCA}. Note however that the deﬁnitions are not restricted to schemes with deterministic updates:
such schemes are simply insecure in terms of randIND-UPD-CPA and randIND-UE-CPA.
Ciphertext Integrity. In ciphertext integrity (CTXT) game, the adversary is allowed to make calls to oracles
O.Enc,O.Next,O.Upd andO.Corr. At some pointA attempts to provide a forgery viaO.Try; as part of this
query the challenger will assess if it is valid. We distinguish between the single-O.Try case (INT-CTXTs) and
the multi-O.Try case (INT-CTXT). Here, “valid” means decryption outputs a message (i.e. not ⊥). In the
single-O.Try case,A can continue making oracle queries after its O.Try query, however this is of no beneﬁt
since it has already won or lost. In the multi- O.Try case,A can make any number ofO.Try queries: as long
as it wins once, it wins the ciphertext integrity game. Formally, the deﬁnition of ciphertext integrity is given in
Deﬁnition 4.
Deﬁnition 4. Let UE = {UE.KG, UE.TG, UE.Enc, UE.Dec, UE.Upd} be an updatable encryption scheme.
Then the INT-CTXT advantage of an adversaryA against UE is deﬁned as
AdvINT-CTXT
UE,A (λ) = Pr[ExpINT-CTXT
UE,A = 1]
where the experiment ExpINT-CTXT
UE,A is given in Fig. 6 and Fig. 10. Particularly, ifA is allowed to ask only one
O.Try query, denote such notion as INT-CTXTs.
12
ExpINT-CTXT
UE,A (λ)
1 : do Setup
2 : win← 0
3 : AO.Enc,O.Next,O.Upd,O.Corr,O.Try(λ)
4 : if twf = 1
5 : win← 0
6 : return win
Figure 10: INT-CTXT security notion for updatable encryption scheme UE and adversaryA. Deciding twf
and computingL∗ are discussed in Section 3.2.
Note that INT-CTXT trivially implies INT-CTXTs. We can prove that INT-CTXTs implies INT-CTXT
too, with loss upper-bounded by the number of O.Try queries. We prove this result in Lemma 1. KLR19
deﬁned ciphertext integrity with one O.Try query plus access to O.Dec, and the game ends when the O.Try
query happens. It is hard to prove the generic relation among CPA, CTXT and CCA using this formulation.
Notice that decryption oracles give the adversary power to win the CTXT game even it only has one O.Try
query. The adversary can send its forgery to the decryption oracle to test if it is valid (if O.Dec outputs a
message and not⊥) – thusA can continue to send forgeries toO.Dec until a valid one is found, and then send
this as aO.Try query (and win the game). So intuitively, a decryption oracle is equivalent to multiple O.Try
queries. Proving that all these variants of CTXT deﬁnitions are equivalent to each other is straightforward, with
the loss upper-bounded by the sum ofO.Try queries and decryption queries.
Remark 1. The deﬁnition of INT-CTXT is more natural for deﬁning ciphertext integrity, however, it is eas-
ier to use INT-CTXTs notion to prove ciphertext integrity for speciﬁc UE schemes. As INT-CTXT ⇐⇒
INT-CTXTs, we use both deﬁnitions in this paper.
Lemma 1. Let UE ={UE.KG, UE.TG, UE.Enc, UE.Dec, UE.Upd} be an updatable encryption scheme. For
any INT-CTXT adversaryA against UE that queries as most QTO.Try queries, there exists an INT-CTXTs
adversaryB1 against UE such that
AdvINT-CTXT
UE,A (λ)≤QT· AdvINT-CTXTs
UE,B1 (λ).
Proof. As deﬁnition 4, we have
AdvINT-CTXT
UE,A (λ) = Pr[ExpINT-CTXT
UE,A = 1].
We deﬁneQT games, for the i-th gameGi, it is identical to INT-CTXT game except for the challenger only
responses the i-thO.Try query and returns⊥ to the rest ofO.Try queries. Then we have
Pr[ExpINT-CTXT
UE,A = 1]≤
QT∑
i=1
Pr[Gi = 1].
Then we claim that for anyi∈{ 1, ...,Q T} there exists an adversary
Pr[Gi = 1] = AdvINT-CTXTs
UE,B1,i (λ).
We can construct the reduction B1,i playing INT-CTXTs game and simulating the responses of Gi by
submitting thei-thO.Try query to its INT-CTXTs challenger and returns⊥ for the restO.Try queries. Other
queries and the ﬁnal result can be passed from INT-CTXTs game toGi. Then we have the desired result.
3.1 Existing Deﬁnitions of Conﬁdentiality
Here we describe existing conﬁdentiality notions given by LT18 and KLR19, including formal deﬁnitions for
their IND-yy-CPA and IND-yy-CCA notions, respectively. (Note that KLR19 used UP-REENC to refer to the
the unlinkability notion that we and LT18 callIND-UPD). We will deﬁne our new security notion in Section 4.1
and compare the relationship between all notions in Section 4.2.
13
Deﬁnition 5. Let UE = {UE.KG, UE.TG, UE.Enc, UE.Dec, UE.Upd} be an updatable encryption scheme.
Then the xxIND-ENC-atk advantage, for (xx, atk)∈{ (det, CPA), (rand, CPA), (det, CCA)}, of an adversary
A against UE is deﬁned as
AdvxxIND-ENC-atk
UE,A (λ) =
⏐⏐⏐⏐Pr[ExpxxIND-ENC-atk-1
UE,A = 1]− Pr[ExpxxIND-ENC-atk-0
UE,A = 1]
⏐⏐⏐⏐,
where the experiment ExpxxIND-ENC-atk-b
UE,A is given in Fig. 6, Fig. 8 and Fig. 11.
Deﬁnition 6. Let UE = {UE.KG, UE.TG, UE.Enc, UE.Dec, UE.Upd} be an updatable encryption scheme.
Then the xxIND-UPD-atk advantage, for (xx, atk)∈{ (det, CPA), (rand, CPA), (det, CCA)}, of an adversary
A against UE is deﬁned as
AdvxxIND-UPD-atk
UE,A (λ) =
⏐⏐⏐Pr[ExpxxIND-UPD-atk-1
UE,A = 1]− Pr[ExpxxIND-UPD-atk-0
UE,A = 1]
⏐⏐⏐,
where the experiments ExpxxIND-UPD-atk-b
UE,A are given in Fig. 6, Fig. 8 and Fig. 12.
ExpxxIND-ENC-atk-b
UE,A (λ)
1 : ( ¯M0, ¯M1)←A
2 : Create ˜C with ( ¯M0, ¯M1)
3 : if| ¯M0|⁄ =| ¯M1|
4 : return ⊥
5 : ˜C
$
← −UE.Enc(k˜e, ¯Mb)
6 : return ˜C
Figure 11: Challenge call deﬁnition for
xxIND-ENC-atk security experiment; the full
experiment is given in combination with Fig. 6 and
Fig. 8.
ExpxxIND-UPD-atk-b
UE,A (λ)
1 : ( ¯C0, ¯C1)←A
2 : Create ˜C with (¯C0, ¯C1)
3 : if|¯C0|⁄ =|¯C1|
4 : return ⊥
5 : if (¯C0, ˜e-1) /∈L or (¯C1, ˜e-1) /∈L
6 : return ⊥
7 : ˜C
$
← −UE.Upd(∆˜e, ¯Cb)
8 : return ˜C
Figure 12: Challenge call deﬁnition for
xxIND-UPD-atk security experiment; the full
experiment is given in combination with Fig. 6 and
Fig. 8.
We do not deﬁne randIND-ENC-CCA or randIND-UPD-CCA – these notions were formalized by KLR19.
Note that trivial win via direct update (see Section 3.2) is never triggered in the detIND-ENC-CPA game.
Thus, randIND-ENC-CPA is equivalent to detIND-ENC-CPA. For simplicity, we will often denote the notion
xxIND-ENC-CPA as IND-ENC-CPA.
Remark 2. LT18 deﬁned weakIND-ENC-CPA and weakIND-UPD-CPA for analyzing BLMR+, a modiﬁcation
of BLMR’s scheme where the nonce is encrypted using symmetric encryption. In this notion, the adversary
trivially loses if it obtains an update token linking the challenge epoch to the epoch before or after. In Section B
we show that BLMR+ is weakIND-UE-CPA secure.
3.2 Trivial Win Conditions
3.2.1 Trivial Win Conditions in Conﬁdentiality Games
Trivial wins via keys and ciphertexts. The following is for analyzing all conﬁdentiality games. We again
follow LT18 in deﬁning the epoch identiﬁcation sets C∗,K∗ andT∗ as the extended sets of C,K andT in
which the adversary has learned or inferred information via its acquired tokens. These extended sets are used
to exclude cases in which the adversary trivially wins, i.e. ifC∗∩K∗⁄=∅, then there exists an epoch in which
the adversary knows the epoch key and a valid update of the challenge ciphertext. Note that the challenger
computes these sets once the adversary has ﬁnished running. We employ the following algorithms of LT18 (for
bi-directional updates):
14
K∗←{ e∈{ 0, ...,n}|CorrK(e) = true}
true← CorrK(e) ⇐⇒ (e∈K )∨ (CorrK(e-1)∧ e∈T )∨ (CorrK(e+1)∧ e+1∈T )
T∗←{ e∈{ 0, ...,n}|(e∈T )∨ (e∈K∗∧ e-1∈K∗)}
C∗←{ e∈{ 0, ...,n}|ChallEq(e) = true}
true← ChallEq(e) ⇐⇒
(e = ˜e)∨ (e∈C )∨ (ChallEq(e-1)∧ e∈T ∗)∨ (ChallEq(e+1)∧ e+1∈T ∗)
Trivial wins via direct updates. The following is for analyzing detIND-yy-atk security notions, for yy∈
{UE, UPD} and atk∈{ CPA, CCA}, where the adversary provides as its challenge one or two ciphertexts that
it received fromO.Enc. The challenger needs to use L to track the information the adversary has about these
challenge input values.
Deﬁne a new listI as the list of epochs in which the adversary learned an updated version of the cipher-
text(s) given as a challenge input. Furthermore, deﬁne I∗ to be the extended set in which the adversary has
learned or inferred information via token corruption. We will use this set to exclude cases which the adversary
trivially wins, i.e. ifI∗∩C∗⁄=∅, then there exists an epoch in which the adversary knows the updated cipher-
text of ¯C and a valid challenge-equal ciphertext. For deterministic updates, the adversary can simply compare
these ciphertexts to win the game. In particular, if ¯C is restricted to come from˜e−1 (recall the challenge epoch
is ˜e), then the conditionI∗∩C∗⁄=∅ is equivalent to the win condition that LT18 used forIND-UPD: ∆˜e∈T ∗
orA didO.Upd(¯C) in ˜e. Our generalization is necessary for a variant of xxIND-UE-atk that we deﬁne later in
which the challenge ciphertext input can come from any prior epoch, and not just the epoch immediately before
the one in which the challenge is made.
To computeI, ﬁnd an entry in L that contains challenge input ¯C. Then for that entry, note the query
identiﬁer c, scanL for other entries with this identiﬁer, and add into listI all found indices:
I←{ e∈{ 0, ...,n}|(c,·, e)∈L}.
Then computeI∗ as follows:
I∗←{ e∈{ 0, ...,n}|ChallinputEq(e) = true}
true← ChallinputEq(e) ⇐⇒
(e∈I )∨ (ChallinputEq(e-1)∧ e∈T ∗)∨ (ChallinputEq(e+1)∧ e+1∈T ∗)
Additionally, if the adversary submits two ciphertexts ¯C0, ¯C1 as challenge (as in xxIND-UPD-atk), we
computeIi,I∗
i,i ∈{ 0, 1} ﬁrst and then useI∗ =I∗
0∪I∗
1 to check the trivial win condition. An example of
trivial win conditionsK∗∩C∗⁄=∅ andI∗∩C∗⁄=∅ is shown in Fig. 16.
We do not consider this trivial win condition for the ENC notion, as there is no ciphertext in the challenge
input value, i.e.I∗ =∅. Thus, the assessmentI∗∩C∗⁄=∅ in experiment ExpdetIND-ENC-atk-b
UE,A (see Fig. 8) will
never be true.
Trivial wins via decryptions. The following is for analyzing detIND-yy-CCA for yy∈{ UE, ENC, UPD},
where the adversary has access toO.Dec. We follow the trivial win analysis in KLR19: suppose the adversary
knows a challenge ciphertext (˜C, e0)∈ ˜L and tokens from epoch e0 + 1 to epoch e, then the adversary can
update the challenge ciphertext from epoch e0 to epoch e. IfA sends the updated ciphertext toO.Dec this will
reveal the underlying message, andA trivially wins the game: we shall exclude this type of attack.
Deﬁne ˜L∗ to be the extended set of ˜L in which the adversary has learned or inferred information via token
corruption. Whenever O.Dec receives a ciphertext located in ˜L∗, the challenger will set the trivial win ﬂag
twf to be 1. The list ˜L∗ is updated while the security game is running. After the challenge query happens, the
challenger updates ˜L∗ whenever an element is added to list ˜L or a token is corrupted. In Fig. 13 we show how
list ˜L∗ is updated.
15
Update ˜L∗
1 : if challenge query orO.Upd ˜C happens
2 : ˜L∗← ˜L∗∪{ (˜C,·)}
3 : if phase = 1 andO.Corr(token,·) happens
4 : fori∈T ∗ and (˜Ci−1,i− 1)∈ ˜L∗ do
5 : ˜L∗← ˜L∗∪{ (˜Ci,i )}
Figure 13: Update procedure for list ˜L∗
UpdateL∗
1 : ifO.Enc orO.Upd happens
2 : L∗←L∗∪{ (·, C,·)}
3 : ifO.Corr(token,·) happens
4 : fori∈T ∗ do
5 : for (j, Ci−1,i− 1)∈L∗ do
6 : C i← UE.Upd(∆i, Ci−1)
7 : L∗←L∗∪{ (j, Ci,i )}
Figure 14: Update procedure for listL∗.
3.2.2 Trivial Win Conditions in Ciphertext Integrity Games
We again follow the trivial win analysis in KLR19. In ciphertext integrity games for updatable encryption, we
do not consider the randomized update setting as the adversary can update an old ciphertext via a corrupted
token to provide any number of new valid forgeries to the Try query to trivially win this game.
Trivial wins via keys. If an epoch key is corrupted, then the adversary can use this key to forge ciphertexts in
this epoch. We exclude this trivial win: if the adversary provides a forgery in an epoch in listK∗, the challenger
sets twf to 1.
Trivial wins via ciphertexts. Suppose the adversary knows a ciphertext (C, e0)∈L and tokens from epoch
e0 + 1 to epoch e, then the adversary can provide a forgery by updating C to epoch e. We shall exclude this
type of forgeries.
DeﬁneL∗ to be the extended set ofL in which the adversary has learned or inferred information via token
corruption. IfO.Try receives a ciphertext located inL∗, the challenger will set twf to 1. The listL∗ is updated
while the security game is running. Ciphertexts output by O.Enc andO.Upd are known to the adversary.
Furthermore, whenever a token is corrupted, the challenger may update listL∗ as well. In Fig. 14 we show how
listL∗ is updated.
3.3 Firewall Technique
In order to prove security for updatable encryption in the epoch-based model with strong corruption capabilities,
cryptographic separation is required between the epochs in which the adversary knows key material, and those
in which it knows challenge-equal ciphertexts (acquired/calculated via queries to O.Upd ˜C andO.Corr(∆)).
To ensure this, we follow prior work in explicitly deﬁning the ‘safe’ orinsulated regions, as we explain below.
These regions insulate epoch keys, tokens and ciphertexts: outside of an insulated region a reduction in a
security proof can generate keys and tokens itself, but within these regions it must embed its challenge while
still providing the underlying adversary with access to the appropriate oracles. A thorough discussion of how
we leverage these insulated regions in proofs is given in Section 5.3.
To understand the idea of ﬁrewalls, consider any security game (for bi-directional schemes) in which the
trivial win conditions are not triggered. If the adversaryA corrupts all tokens then either it never corrupts any
keys or it never asks for a challenge ciphertext. Suppose that A does ask for a challenge ciphertext in epoch
˜e 8. Then there exists an (unique) epoch continuum around ˜e such that no keys in this epoch continuum, and
no tokens in the boundaries of this epoch continuum are corrupted. Moreover, we can assume that all tokens
within this epoch continuum are corrupted, because once the adversary has ﬁnished corrupting keys, it can
corrupt any remaining tokens that do not ‘touch’ those corrupted keys. This observation is ﬁrst used in the
IND-UPD proof of RISE provided by Lehmann and Tackmann [LT18a], and Klooß et al. [KLR19a] provided
an extended description of this ‘key insulation’ technique. We name these epoch ranges insulated regions and
their boundaries to be ﬁrewalls.
8In the situation that the adversary does not corrupt any keys to the left or the right (or both) of the challenge epoch, the insulated
region thus extends to the boundary (or boundaries) of the epoch continuum.
16
Deﬁnition 7. An insulated region with ﬁrewalls fwl and fwr is a consecutive sequence of epochs(fwl,..., fwr)
for which:
• no key in the sequence of epochs (fwl,..., fwr) is corrupted;
• the tokens ∆fwl and ∆fwr+1 are not corrupted (if they exist);
• all tokens (∆fwl+1,..., ∆fwr) are corrupted (if any exist).
We denote the ﬁrewalls bordering the special insulated region that contains ˜e as ˆfwl and ˆfwr – though note
that there could be (many, distinct) insulated regions elsewhere in the epoch continuum. Speciﬁcally, when
the adversary asks for updated versions of the challenge ciphertext, the epoch in which this query occurs must
also fall within (what the challenger later calculates as) an insulated region. In Fig. 15 we give an algorithm
FW-Find for computing ﬁrewall locations. The list FW tracks, and appends a label to, each insulated region
and its ﬁrewalls. Observe that if an epoch is a left ﬁrewall, then neither the key nor the token for that epoch are
corrupted. From the left ﬁrewall, since we assume that all tokens are corrupted, track to the right until either a
token is not corrupted or a key is.
FW-Find
1 : FW←∅
2 : j = 0
3 : for e∈{ 0, ...,n} do
4 : if e∈¬ (T∗∪K∗)
5 : j←j + 1
6 : fwlj← e
7 : if (e + 1 /∈T ∗) and (e /∈K∗)
8 : fwrj← e
9 : FW←{ (j, fwlj, fwrj)}
Figure 15: Algorithm FW-Find for computing all ﬁrewalls.
3.3.1 Example of Epoch Corruption and Trivial Wins
In Fig. 16 we indicate the trivial win conditions and insulated regions for a particular adversarial corruption
strategy, in the experiment for detIND-UE∗-CPA (this notion chosen here to demonstrate how the challenger
populates its lists). Suppose challenge epoch ˜e = 8, and further assumeK∗ ={1, 6, 9}, andT∗ ={3, 4, 8},
meaning thatC∗ ={7, 8}. Suppose ¯C is in epoch 1 and the adversary has asked O.Upd(¯C) in epoch 2, so
¯C2, ¯C3, ¯C4 are updated ciphertexts of ¯C, thereforeI∗ ={1, 2, 3, 4}. SoC∗∩K∗ =∅ andI∗∩C∗ =∅, the trivial
win conditions have not occurred. Then we see insulated regions: {0} is the ﬁrst insulated region,{2, 3, 4} is
the second insulated region, etc. We computeT∗∪K∗ ={1, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9}, so¬(T∗∪K∗) ={0, 2, 5, 7}: using
FW-Find we know this is the set of left ﬁrewalls, and the right ﬁrewalls are{0, 4, 5, 8}.
Epoch {0} 1 {2 3 4} { 5} 6 {7 ˜e} 9
Key × k1 × × × × k6 × × k9
Token × × ∆3 ∆4 × × × ∆8 ×
Challenge ciphertexts × × × × × × × ˜C7 ˜C8 ×
Challenge input × ¯C ¯C2 ¯C3 ¯C4 × × × × ×
Figure 16: An example of trivial win conditions and insulated regions incurred by an adversary playing
detIND-UE∗-CPA, where× indicates the keys/tokens/ciphertexts not revealed to the adversary, and {} indi-
cates insulated regions.
17
4 On the Security of Updates
In this section we present a new notion of security for updatable encryption schemes, which we denotexxIND-UE-atk.
This notion captures both security of fresh encryptions (i.e. impliesxxIND-ENC-atk) and unlinkability (i.e. im-
plies xxIND-UPD-atk). We ﬁrst explain the new notion and then describe its relation to previous notions. Then,
we prove a generic relationship among CPA, CTXT and CCA to complete the picture for security notions for
UE schemes.
4.1 A New Deﬁnition of Conﬁdentiality
In the security game for xxIND-UE-atk, the adversary submits one message and a ciphertext from an earlier
epoch that the adversary received via a call toO.Enc. The challenger responds with either an encryption of that
message or an update of that earlier ciphertext, in the challenge (current) epoch ˜e.
Deﬁnition 8 (xxIND-UE-atk). Let UE ={UE.KG, UE.TG, UE.Enc, UE.Dec, UE.Upd} be an updatable en-
cryption scheme. Then the xxIND-UE-atk advantage, for (xx, atk)∈{ (det, CPA), (rand, CPA), (det, CCA)},
of an adversaryA against UE is deﬁned as
AdvxxIND-UE-atk
UE,A (λ) =
⏐⏐⏐Pr[ExpxxIND-UE-atk-1
UE,A = 1]− Pr[ExpxxIND-UE-atk-0
UE,A = 1]
⏐⏐⏐
where the experiment ExpxxIND-UE-atk-b
UE,A is given in Fig. 6, Fig. 8 and Fig. 17.
Note that randIND-UE-CPA is strictly stronger than detIND-UE-CPA, since the adversary has strictly more
capabilities. A generalized version of xxIND-UE-atk, denoted xxIND-UE∗-atk, is also given in Fig. 17. In
this game the input challenge ciphertext can come from (i.e. be known to A in) any prior epoch, not just the
epoch immediately before ˜e. Note that xxIND-UE-atk is a special case of xxIND-UE∗-atk. Under some fairly
weak requirements (that all schemes discussed in this paper satisfy) we can prove that xxIND-UE-atk implies
xxIND-UE∗-atk – we prove this result in Section. 4.2.1.
ExpxxIND-UE-atk-b
UE,A (λ)
1 : ( ¯M, ¯C)←A
2 : Create ˜C with ( ¯M, ¯C)
3 : if (¯C, ˜e− 1) /∈L
4 : return ⊥
5 : ˜C˜e,0← UE.Enc(k˜e, ¯M)
6 : ˜C˜e,1← UE.Upd(∆˜e, ¯C)
7 : if|˜C˜e,0|⁄ =|˜C˜e,1|
8 : return ⊥
9 : return ˜C˜e,b
ExpxxIND-UE∗-atk-b
UE,A (λ)
1 : ( ¯M, (¯C, e′))←A
2 : Create ˜C with ( ¯M, (¯C, e′))
3 : if (¯C, e′) /∈L
4 : return ⊥
5 : ˜C˜e,0← UE.Enc(k˜e, ¯M)
6 : ˜Ce′,1← ¯C
7 : forj∈{ e′+1, ..., ˜e} do
8 : ˜Cj,1← UE.Upd(∆j, ˜Cj−1,1)
9 : if|˜C˜e,0|⁄ =|˜C˜e,1|
10 : return ⊥
11 : return ˜C˜e,b
Figure 17: Challenge call deﬁnition for xxIND-UE-atk and xxIND-UE∗-atk security experiments; the full
experiment is deﬁned in Fig. 6 and Fig. 8.
Remark 3. The deﬁnition of xxIND-UE-atk is more concise and intuitively easier to understand than that of
xxIND-UE∗-atk, however in Theorem 2.1 and Theorem 2.2 in Section 4.2.1 we show thatxxIND-UE-atk ⇐⇒
xxIND-UE∗-atk. This result and our generic proof techniques mean that all results in this paper that hold for
xxIND-UE-atk, also hold for xxIND-UE∗-atk, and vice versa.
Remark 4. In Section C.1 we show that the RISE scheme presented by LT18 is randIND-UE-CPA secure
under DDH. While this result is perhaps unsurprising 9, the proof techniques we use are novel and may be of
9LT18 had already shown that RISE is IND-ENC-CPA and randIND-UPD-CPA, so our result shows that it is stronger than was
previously known.
18
independent interest. We give an Oracle-DDH-like game that inherits the epoch-based nature of the updatable
encryption security model, and then use this as a bridge to prove security.
4.2 Relations among Security Notions
In Fig. 18 we show the relationship between the new and existing UE security notions. Note that our new
notion is strictly stronger than the xxIND-ENC-atk and xxIND-UPD-atk notions presented in prior work, and
is in fact stronger than the combination of the prior notions. Further, we show that the generic relation among
CPA, CTXT and CCA, that CPA security coupled with ciphertext integrity implies CCA security, also holds
for updatable encryption schemes. The relationships are proven via Theorem 2.2 to 2.8, and Theorem 3, which
follow next.
Theorem 2 (Informal Theorem). The relationship among the security notions xxIND-UE-atk, xxIND-ENC-atk
and xxIND-UPD-atk are as in Fig. 18. This is proven via Theorem 2.2 to 2.8, and Theorem 3.
randIND-UE-CPA
IND-ENC-CPA
randIND-UPD-CPA
IND-ENC-CPA
+randIND-UPD-CPA
Thm. 2.3
2.5
\ 2.7
detIND-UE-CPA
detIND-UPD-CPA
IND-ENC-CPA
IND-ENC-CPA
+detIND-UPD-CPA
2.6
2.4+2.2
\ 2.7
Def. 8
\
2.8
detIND-UE-CCA
detIND-UPD-CCA
detIND-ENC-CCA
IND-ENC-CCA
+detIND-UPD-CCA
+CTXT
Thm. 3
+CTXT
Thm. 3
+CTXT
Thm. 3
2.4+2.2
2.6
\ 2.7
Figure 18: Relations among conﬁdentiality notions xxIND-yy-atk for xx ∈ { det, rand}, yy ∈
{UE, ENC, UPD}, atk∈{ CPA, CCA}, and ciphertext integrity (INT-CTXT). Arrow labelling refers to Theo-
rem numbering except where otherwise speciﬁed.
4.2.1 Relations between IND-UE and IND-UE∗
Properties of Deterministic Updates Here we will use an an alternative representation of UE.Enc that spec-
iﬁes a deterministic algorithm with randomness as input, i.e. Ce← UE.Enc(ke, M;r).
One of our main contributions is a scheme with a deterministic update mechanism – we now discuss some
of the properties of such schemes. The ﬁrst two properties, simulatable token generation and randomness-
preserving updates, were introduced by Klooß et al. [KLR19a]. Simulatable token generation states that the
real token looks like a token generated from a token simulation algorithm, as we consider bi-directional updates
we omit the generation of the reverse token. Randomness-preserving states that the update of a ciphertext looks
like an encryption of the same message, with the same randomness, under the new key.
Deﬁnition 9 (Simulatable token [KLR19a]) . Let UE be an updatable encryption scheme. We say that UE
has simulatable token generation if it has the following property: There is a PPT algorithm SimTG(λ) which
samples a token ∆. Furthermore, for arbitrary (ﬁxed) kold
$← −UE.KG(λ) following distributions of ∆ are
identical:
•{∆| ∆ $← −SimTG(λ)}
•{∆| knew
$← −UE.KG(λ), ∆← UE.TG(kold, knew)}
19
Notice that BLMR, BLMR+, RISE, SHINE all have simulatable token generation. Furthermore, the simu-
latable token generation algorithms of these UE schemes generates a token by randomly picking a token from
the token space, i.e. SimTG : ∆ $← −TS.
Deﬁnition 10 (Randomness-preserving [KLR19a]) . Let UE be an updatable encryption scheme. We say
that UE.Upd (for UE) is randomness-preserving if the following holds: First, as usually assumed, UE en-
crypts with uniformly chosen randomness. Second, all keys (kold, knew) $← −UE.KG(λ), tokens ∆new $← −
UE.TG(kold, knew), plaintextm and randomnessr, we have
UE.Upd(∆new, Cold) = UE.Enc(knew,m ;r),
where Cold = UE.Enc(kold,m ;r).
Suppose Ci = UE.Enc(ki,m ;r), and Cj is an update of Ci from epoch i to epoch j. Randomness-
preserving property makes sure that Cj = UE.Enc(kj,m ;r), which means a (updated) ciphertext under some
epoch key is uniquely decided by the message and randomness.
We deﬁne an even weaker property which we call update-preserving: any update sequence starting and
ending at the same key that starts with the same ciphertext will result in the same ciphertext.
Deﬁnition 11 (Update-preserving). Let UE be an updatable encryption scheme with deterministic update algo-
rithm. We say that UE.Upd (for UE) is update-preserving if the following holds: for any two sequence of key
pairs with the same start key and end key(ki, ki+1, ..., kj) and (k′
i, k′
i+1, ..., k′
j), where ki(= k′
i), ki+1, k′
i+1, ...,
kj−1, k′
j−1, kj(= k′
j) $← −UE.KG(λ), and tokens ∆l
$← −UE.TG(kl−1, kl), ∆′
l
$← −UE.TG(k′
l−1, k′
l), for any ci-
phertext Ci in epochi, we have Cj = C′
j where C′
i = Ci, Cl = UE.Upd(∆l, Cl−1), C′
l = UE.Upd(∆′
l, C′
l−1)
forl =i + 1, ...,j .
The diagrams in Fig. 19 show how the property works, with the left-hand side indicating keys and tokens
and the right-hand side showing ciphertexts.
ki
k′
i+1
ki+1
k′
j−1
kj−1
kj
∆′
i+1 ∆′
i+2, ..., ∆′
j−1 ∆′
j
∆i+1 ∆i+2, ..., ∆j−1 ∆j Ci
C′
i+1
Ci+1
C′
j−1
Cj−1
Cj
∆′
i+1 ∆′
i+2, ..., ∆′
j−1 ∆′
j
∆i+1 ∆i+2, ..., ∆j−1 ∆j
Figure 19: Keys and updated ciphertexts in Deﬁnition 11
Update-preserving property implies that the updated ciphertext is uniquely determined by (Ci,k j,j -i),
where Ci is the beginning ciphertext for updating,j-i decides how many updates have occurred, andkj decides
the value of the ending epoch’s epoch key.
We now deﬁne another property which states that ciphertexts encrypted under one key can be simulated by
ciphertexts encrypted under another key. All schemes in this paper meet this property.
Deﬁnition 12 (Simulatable Encryption). Let UE be an updatable encryption scheme. For all keys kold, knew $← −
UE.KG(λ), tokens ∆new $← −UE.TG(kold, knew), plaintext m, deﬁne X old,X new to be the statistical distribu-
tion of the ciphertexts output by UE.Enc(kold,m ), UE.Enc(knew,m ), resp.. We say that UE has simulatable
encryption if update algorithm keeps the ciphertext distribution, i.e. UE.Upd(∆new,X old) dist= X new.
Note that we do not restrict that the update algorithm is probabilistic. This means when the update algorithm
is deterministic, it will not add randomness to the updated ciphertext, and it maintains the ciphertext distribution.
For example, suppose U(Z) is a uniform distribution over Z, and for any integer ∆, let UE.Upd(∆,x ) =
x+∆, then UE.Upd(∆,U (Z)) =U(Z). This deﬁnition looks similar to the deﬁnition of perfect re-encryption
provided by Klooß et al. [KLR19a], which mandates that update has the same distribution as decrypt-then-
encrypt. Perfect re-encryption requires the update algorithm is probabilistic, which makes it possible for any
updated ciphertext looks like a fresh encryption. The simulatable encryption property is to make sure that the
update algorithm can keep the distribution of encryption – however it is not necessary to require that the update
algorithm is probabilistic.
20
All schemes discussed in this paper satisfy all of the above properties. Note that randomness-preserving
property is strictly stronger than the update-preserving property and simulatable encryption. Obviously, if
a scheme is randomness-preserving then it is also update-preserving and has simulatable encryption. How-
ever, the update-preserving property does not imply randomness-preserving property, even with simulatable
encryption. To see this, construct a deterministic update variant of the RISE scheme (Section C) such that the
randomnessr updates tor + 2: this scheme has the update-preserving property and simulatable encryption, but
not the randomness-preserving property.
xxIND-UE-atk implies xxIND-UE∗-atk. We provexxIND-UE-atk implies xxIND-UE∗-atk in this section, and
consequently xxIND-UE-atk and xxIND-UE∗-atk are equivalent.
randIND-UE-CPA implies randIND-UE∗-CPA.
Theorem 2.1. Let UE ={UE.KG, UE.TG, UE.Enc, UE.Dec, UE.Upd} be an updatable encryption scheme.
For any randIND-UE∗-CPA adversaryA against UE, there exists an randIND-UE-CPA adversaryB2.1 against
UE such that
AdvrandIND-UE∗-CPA
UE,A (λ)≤ AdvrandIND-UE-CPA
UE,B2.1 (λ).
Proof. We construct a reduction B2.1: before the epoch counter is incremented, every ciphertext is updated
using the available update oracles. This needs to happen when the adversary moves to the next epoch, so that
it is always possible to provide a valid challenge input to the reducton’s ownrandIND-UE-CPA challenger and
respond with a valid challenge output to the adversary.
More precisely, when the adversary makes the randIND-UE∗-CPA challenge query, the reduction make its
own randIND-UE-CPA query, submitting the ciphertext provided by the adversary but updated to the epoch one
before the challenge epoch that both algorithms are in. This should give the exact same result as updating the
older ciphertext. Consequently, and since all other oracle queries can just be forwarded, the reduction perfectly
simulates the randIND-UE∗-CPA game. We have the required result.
detIND-UE-atk implies detIND-UE∗-atk.
Proof technique of Theorem 2.2. The proof uses the ﬁrewall technique, where the reduction will ‘pause’ its
own epoch continuum while responding to the adversary’s queries. The main left ﬁrewall in thedetIND-UE∗-atk
game is an epoch in which the detIND-UE-atk reduction can possibly ask for a valid challenge query. Before
the left ﬁrewall, the reduction sends the queries received from the adversaryA to its own detIND-UE-atk chal-
lenger, and forwards responses to A. Within the ﬁrewalls, the reduction stops asking any O.Next queries,
and instead simulates the responses of each query to provide answers to A. Because of this action, the
detIND-UE-atk challenger will stay in epoch ˆfwl. When A makes the detIND-UE∗-atk challenge queries
(if the trivial win conditions of the detIND-UE∗-atk game are not satisﬁed then the trivial win conditions of the
detIND-UE-atk game will be not satisﬁed as well), the reduction makes its detIND-UE-atk query using the old
ciphertext (in ˆfwl− 1) instead. After receiving the response, the reduction updates its challenge ciphertext to
the challenge epoch to reply toA. After the right ﬁrewall, the query responses are calculated and forwarded, in
the same manner as before the left ﬁrewall.
Theorem 2.2. Let UE = {UE.KG, UE.TG, UE.Enc, UE.Dec, UE.Upd} be an updatable encryption scheme
has simulatable token generation, update-preserving property and simulatable encryption property. For any
detIND-UE∗-atk adversaryA against UE, where atk∈{ CPA, CCA}, there exists an detIND-UE-atk adversary
B2.2 against UE such that
AdvdetIND-UE∗-atk
UE,A (λ)≤ (n + 1)2· AdvdetIND-UE-atk
UE,B2.2 (λ),
Proof. We use three steps to prove this result.
(Step 1.) Consider a modiﬁed version of detIND-UE∗-atk. For b∈{ 0, 1}, deﬁne experiments ExpINT1-b
to be the same as ExpdetIND-UE∗-atk-b except that the experiments randomly pick ˆfwl, ˆfwr, and if ˆfwl, ˆfwr are
not the ﬁrewalls around challenge epoch ˜e, then the experiment returns a random bit b′. More formally, the
21
values ˆfwl, ˆfwr are the desired ﬁrewalls if the challenge is made inside – i.e. ˜e∈ [ ˆfwl, ˆfwr] – and they actually
consitute an insulate region, i.e. (, ˆfwl, ˆfwr)∈FW )).
These ﬁrewalls ˆfwl, ˆfwr could take any value in{0, ...,n}, so this loss is upper bounded by (n + 1)2. We
have
AdvdetIND-UE∗atk
UE,A (λ)≤ (n + 1)2AdvINT1
UE,A.
(Step 2.) Then we consider experiments ExpINT2-b, which is the same as ExpINT1-b except for: in the
insulated region all encryptions are updated ciphertexts of ciphertexts encrypted in left ﬁrewall ˆfwl By this we
mean that if the adversary asks for anyO.Enc,O.Dec and challenge query, the responses work as follows:
•O.Enc(M): if called in an epoch ˆfwl< e≤ ˆfwr, encrypt the message in left ﬁrewall ˆfwl, then update the
ciphertext to epoch e, and return the updated ciphertext.
•O.Dec(C): if called in an epoch ˆfwl < e≤ ˆfwr, reverse update the ciphertext from e back to ˆfwl, then
decrypt the updated ciphertext, and return the decrypted value.
• challenge query, on input ( ¯M, (¯C, e′)): if b = 0, encrypt the message ¯M in left ﬁrewall ˆfwl, then update
the ciphertext to the challenge epoch ˜e; if b = 1, update ciphertext ¯C from epoch e′ to epoch ˜e. Return
the challenge ciphertext.
Since we assume that UE has the simulatable encryption property, both operations are possible so we have
AdvINT1
UE,A(λ) = AdvINT2
UE,A(λ).
(Step 3.) We construct a reductionB2.2, detailed in Fig. 20 and Fig. 21, that is playing the detIND-UE-atk
game and runsA. We claim that
AdvINT2
UE,A(λ)≤ AdvdetIND-UE-atk
UE,B2.2 (λ).
If ˆfwl, ˆfwr are the desired ﬁrewalls, then [ ˆfwl, ˆfwr]⊆C∗. If the trivial win conditions in ExpINT2-b are not
set (the same result as the trivial win conditions inExpdetIND-UE∗-atk-b), i.e.I∗∩C∗ =∅, thenI∗∩[ ˆfwl, ˆfwr] =
∅. That meansA never asksO.Upd(¯C) andO.Corr(token) in ˆfwl. So the reduction uses the relevant challenge
input to ask a challenge query to its own detIND-UE-atk challenger in epoch ˆfwl, and it will not trivially lose.
Before the epoch counter is incremented, every ciphertext is updated using the available update oracles.
This needs to happen when the adversary moves to the next epoch, so that it is always possible to provide
a valid challenge input to the reducton’s own detIND-UE-atk challenger and respond with a valid challenge
output to the adversary.
Within the ﬁrewalls, the reduction simulates all ciphertexts and uses the list FL and the list ˜FL to track
non-challenge ciphertexts and challenge-equal ciphertexts, respectively. When the challenge query happens
with input ( ¯M, (¯C, e′)), the reduction can ﬁnd all updated versions of ¯C by checking the ﬁrst entry of the list
L. The reduction uses the ciphertext in epoch ˆfwl-1 with the same query identiﬁer c as a challenge input,
sending to its own detIND-UE-atk challenger. (Note that e′ < ˆfwl, otherwise, [ ˆfwl, ˆfwr]⊆I ∗ and the trivial
win condition is triggered.) After receiving the response from the detIND-UE-atk challenger,B2.2 updates the
received ciphertext to the challenge epoch to replyA.
EventuallyB2.2 receives b′ fromA, and simply outputs b′ to its detIND-UE-atk challenger. When B2.2
interacts with ExpdetIND-UE-atk-b
UE,B2.2 ,B2.2 can perfectly simulate ExpINT2-b
UE,A toA. Then we have the required
result.
4.2.2 Relations among IND-ENC, IND-UPD, and IND-UE
In this section, we analyze the relations among notions with different challenge input. Since similar proof
techniques are used in Theorems 2.3, 2.4, 2.5 and 2.6, of these we give full proof details only for Theorem 2.3.
Theorem 2.3. Let UE ={UE.KG, UE.TG, UE.Enc, UE.Dec, UE.Upd} be an updatable encryption scheme.
For any IND-ENC-CPA adversaryA against UE, there exists an randIND-UE-CPA adversaryB2.3 against UE
such that
AdvIND-ENC-CPA
UE,A (λ)≤ 2· AdvrandIND-UE-CPA
UE,B2.3 (λ).
22
ReductionB2.2 playing ExpdetIND-UE-atk-b
UE,B2.2
1 : do Setup;FL, ˜FL,L, ˜L←∅
2 : ˆfwl, ˆfwr
$
← −{0, ...,n}
3 : ¯M, (¯C, e′)←AO.Enc,(O.Dec),O.Next,O.Upd,O.Corr(λ)
4 : phase← 1
5 : Create ˜C with ( ¯M, (¯C, e′)), get ˜C˜e
6 : b ′←AO.Enc,(O.Dec),O.Next,O.Upd,O.Corr,O.Upd˜C(˜C˜e)
7 : twf← 1 if
8 : C∗∩K∗⁄=∅ or I∗∩C∗⁄=∅
9 : if ABORT occurred or (·, ˆfwl, ˆfwr)⁄∈FW or twf = 1
10 : b ′ $
← −{0, 1}
11 : return b′
Figure 20: Reduction B2.2 for proof of Theorem 2.2. The adversary may call forO.Dec in the CCA game. The
oracles in Fig. 21 show howB2.2 responds toA, including calls to oracles in its own detIND-UE-atk game.
Proof. We construct a reduction B2.3 running the randIND-UE-CPA experiment which will simulate the re-
sponses of queries made by the IND-ENC-CPA adversaryA. To provide a valid non-challenge ciphertext to its
own challenger,B2.3 must runA out of step with its own game, so epoch 0 as far asA is concerned is actually
epoch 1 forB2.3, and so on.
1. B2.3 chooses b $← −{0, 1}.
2. B2.3 receives the setup parameters from its randIND-UE-CPA challenger, chooses M $← −MSand calls
O.Enc(M) which returns some C0. ThenB2.3 callsO.Next once and sends the setup parameters toA.
3. (a) Whenever B2.3 receives the queriesO.Enc,O.Upd,O.Corr fromA,B2.3 sends these queries to its
randIND-UE-CPA challenger, and forwards the responses toA.
(b) WheneverO.Next is called byA,B2.3 randomly chooses a messageM $← −MSand callsO.Enc(M)
to receive some Ce, and then callsO.Next.
4. At some point, in epoch ˜e (for its game),B2.3 receives the challenge query ( ¯M0, ¯M1) fromA. ThenB2.3
sends ( ¯Mb, C˜e−1) as challenge to its own randIND-UE-CPA challenger. After receiving the challenge
ciphertext, ˜C˜e, from its challenger,B2.3 sends ˜C˜e toA.
5. B2.3 continues to answerA’s queries using its own oracles, now includingO.Upd ˜C.
6. FinallyB2.3 receives the output bit b′ fromA. If b = b′ thenB2.3 returns 0. OtherwiseB2.3 returns 1.
We now bound the advantage ofB2.3. The point is that whenever B2.3 returns a random encryption toA,
B2.3’s probability of winning is exactly 1/2 because the bit b′ fromA is independent of its choice of b. This
happens with probability 1/2. However, whenB2.3 returns a “correct” value toA (an encryption of ¯M0 or ¯M1),
thenB2.3’s probability of winning is the same as the probability thatA wins.
First note that, as usual,
AdvrandIND-UE-CPA
UE,B2.3 =|Pr[ExprandIND-UE-CPA-1
UE,B2.3 = 1]− Pr[ExprandIND-UE-CPA-0
UE,B2.3 = 1]|.
We claim thatPr[ExprandIND-UE-CPA-1
UE,B2.3 = 1] = 1/2 because in this case ˜C˜e is independent of b and so b′ must
23
O.Enc(M)
1 : c← c + 1
2 : if e⁄∈{ ˆfwl+1, ..., ˆfwr}
3 : callO.Enc(M), get Ce
4 : L←L∪{ (c, Ce, e)}
5 : if e∈{ ˆfwl+1, ..., ˆfwr}
6 : callO.Enc(M), get C ˆfwl
7 : L←L∪{ (c, C ˆfwl, ˆfwl)}
8 : forj∈{ ˆfwl+1, ..., e} do
9 : C j← UE.Upd(∆j, Cj−1)
10 : FL←FL∪{ (c, Ce, e)}
11 : return Ce
O.Next
12 : if e∈{ 1, ..., ˆfwl-1} then
13 : for (c, Ce−1, e− 1)∈L do
14 : callO.Upd(Ce-1), get Ce
15 : L←L∪{ (c, Ce, e)}
16 : callO.Next
17 : if e∈{ ˆfwr+1, ...,n} then
18 : callO.Next
19 : if e∈{ ˆfwl, ..., ˆfwr-1} then
20 : e← e+1
21 : ∆ e
$
← −SimTG(λ)
22 : if e = ˆfwr then
23 : forj∈{ ˆfwl+1, ..., ˆfwr+1} do
24 : callO.Next
25 : for (c, Cj-1,j -1)∈L do
26 : callO.Upd(Cj-1)
27 : get Cj
28 : L←L∪{ (c, Cj,j )}
29 : for (˜Cj-1,j -1)∈ ˜L do
30 : callO.Upd ˜C(˜Cj-1))
31 : get ˜Cj
32 : ˜L← ˜L∪{ (˜Cj,j )}
O.Upd(Ce−1)
33 : if (c, Ce−1, e− 1) /∈L∪FL
34 : return ⊥
35 : if e∈{ 1, ..., ˆfwl}
36 : callO.Upd(Ce−1), get Ce
37 : L←L∪{ (c, Ce, e)}
38 : if e∈{ ˆfwr+2, ...,n}
39 : callO.Upd(Ce−1), get Ce
40 : L←L∪{ (c, Ce, e)}
41 : if e∈{ ˆfwl+1, ..., ˆfwr}
42 : C e← UE.Upd(∆e, Ce−1)
43 : FL←FL∪{ (c, Ce, e)}
44 : if e = ˆfwr+1
45 : ﬁnd (c, Ce, e)∈L
46 : return Ce
O.Corr(inp, ˆe)
47 : do Check(inp, ˆe; e; ˆfwl, ˆfwr)
48 : if inp = key
49 : K←K∪{ ˆe}
50 : return kˆe
51 : if inp = token
52 : T ←T ∪{ˆe}
53 : if ˆe∈{ 1, ..., ˆfwl-1}
54 : callO.Corr(inp, ˆe)
55 : get ∆ˆe
56 : if{ ˆfwr+2, ...,n}
57 : callO.Corr(inp, ˆe)
58 : get ∆ˆe
59 : if ˆe∈{ ˆfwl+1, ..., ˆfwr}
60 : ﬁnd ∆ˆe
61 : return ∆ˆe
Create ˜C with ( ¯M, (¯C, e′))
62 : if ˜e⁄∈{ ˆfwl, ..., ˆfwr}
63 : ABORT
64 : if (c, ¯C, e′)⁄∈L
65 : ABORT
66 : ﬁnd (c, C ˆfwl−1, ˆfwl− 1)∈L
67 : call cq ( ¯M, C ˆfwl−1)
68 : get ˜C ˆfwl
69 : ˜L← ˜L∪{ (˜C ˆfwl, ˆfwl)}
70 : forj∈{ ˆfwl+1, ..., ˆfwr} do
71 : ˜Cj← UE.Upd(∆j, ˜Cj−1)
72 : ˜FL← ˜FL∪{ (˜Cj,j )}
73 : return ˜C˜e
O.Upd ˜C
74 : if e∈{ 1, ..., ˆfwl-1}
75 : return ⊥
76 : C←C∪{ e}
77 : if e∈{ ˆfwl}
78 : ﬁnd (˜Ce, e)∈ ˜L
79 : if e∈{ ˆfwl+1, ..., ˆfwr}
80 : ﬁnd (˜Ce, e)∈ ˜FL
81 : if e∈{ ˆfwr+1, ...,n}
82 : callO.Upd ˜C, get ˜Ce
83 : return ˜Ce
O.Dec(C)
84 : if phase← 1 and C∈ ˜L∗
85 : twf← 1
86 : return⊥
87 : if e⁄∈{ ˆfwl+1, ..., ˆfwr}
88 : callO.Dec(C), get M′/⊥
89 : if e∈{ ˆfwl+1, ..., ˆfwr}
90 : forj∈{ e, ..., ˆfwl+1} do
91 : C j−1← UE.Upd−1(∆j, Cj)
92 : callO.Dec(C ˆfwl), get M′/⊥
93 : return M′ or⊥
Figure 21: Oracles used in the proof of Theorem 2.2. In line 67 of the Create ˜C description, call cq means that
the reduction makes its own challenge query with these values.
24
also be independent of b. Then we have:
AdvrandIND-UE-CPA
UE,B2.3 =
⏐⏐⏐⏐
1
2− Pr[ExprandIND-UE-CPA-0
UE,B2.3 = 1]
⏐⏐⏐⏐
=
⏐⏐⏐⏐
1
2−
(1
2· Pr[ExpIND-ENC-CPA-0
UE,A = 1] + 1
2· Pr[ExpIND-ENC-CPA-1
UE,A = 0]
)⏐⏐⏐⏐
=
⏐⏐⏐⏐
1
2− 1
2· Pr[ExpIND-ENC-CPA-0
UE,A = 1]− 1
2
(
1− Pr[ExpIND-ENC-CPA-1
UE,A = 1]
)⏐⏐⏐⏐
=
⏐⏐⏐⏐
1
2·
(
Pr[ExpIND-ENC-CPA-0
UE,A = 1]− Pr[ExpIND-ENC-CPA-1
UE,A = 1]
)⏐⏐⏐⏐
= 1
2· AdvIND-ENC-CPA
UE,A .
A remark on Theorem 2.4. Directly proving that detIND-UE-atk implies detIND-ENC-atk is very challeng-
ing, and in fact the difﬁculty is the same as proving that detIND-UE-atk implies detIND-UE∗-atk. Since we
have proved detIND-UE-atk implies detIND-UE∗-atk in Theorem 2.2 in Section 4.2.1, we do not repeat the
similar proof approach here. We can just prove detIND-UE∗-atk implies detIND-ENC-atk, which is easy. We
follow a very similar approach to the proof of Theorem 2.3. ThedetIND-UE∗-atk (reduction) adversary can ask
for tokens almost as freely as the detIND-ENC-atk adversary without incurring the trivial win conditions. But
since there should at least one token, in an epoch before (include) challenge epoch ˜e, is unknown to the adver-
sary, we again have to run our reduction out of step with the detIND-ENC-atk adversary (essentially creating
an artiﬁcial epoch).
Theorem 2.4. Let UE ={UE.KG, UE.TG, UE.Enc, UE.Dec, UE.Upd} be an updatable encryption scheme.
For any detIND-ENC-atk adversaryA against UE, where atk∈{ CPA, CCA}, there exists a detIND-UE∗-atk
adversaryB2.4 against UE such that
AdvdetIND-ENC-atk
UE,A (λ)≤ 2· AdvdetIND-UE∗-atk
UE,B2.4 (λ).
Proof. Similar to the proof strategy in Theorem 2.3, we construct a detIND-UE∗-atk adversaryB2.4 against
UE to simulate the responses to queries made by detIND-ENC-atk adversaryA. B2.4 chooses b $← −{0, 1}.
SinceB2.4 is allowed to takes its challenge ciphertext from any epoch in its detIND-UE∗-atk experiment, it
can in particular uses the random ciphertext created in epoch 0, C0. Note that, in contrast to Step 3 (b) of the
simulation in the proof of Theorem 2.3, there is now no need forB2.4 to generate a random ciphertext for each
epoch. AlsoB2.4 will never ask forO.Upd(C0) to its own detIND-UE∗-atk challenger.
When receiving the challenge query ( ¯M0, ¯M1) fromA, the reductionB2.4 sends ( ¯Mb, C0) as challenge to
its own detIND-UE∗-atk challenger. SinceA has no view of epoch 0,A cannot ask for ∆1. In addition,A will
never ask forO.Upd(C0).
Thus the trivial win conditionI∗∩C∗⁄=∅ will not be satisﬁed in the detIND-UE∗-atk game. The other
trivial win(s), i.e. trivial win via keys and ciphertexts (and trivial wins via decryptions), will also pass from
detIND-ENC-atk game to detIND-UE∗-atk game. The result follows using the same calculation as in the proof
of Theorem 2.3.
Theorem 2.5. Let UE ={UE.KG, UE.TG, UE.Enc, UE.Dec, UE.Upd} be an updatable encryption scheme.
For any randIND-UPD-CPA adversaryA against UE, there exists an randIND-UE-CPA adversaryB2.5 against
UE such that
AdvrandIND-UPD-CPA
UE,A (λ)≤ 2· AdvrandIND-UE-CPA
UE,B2.5 (λ).
Proof. Similarly to the proof of Theorem 2.3, we construct a randIND-UE-CPA reductionB2.5 against UE to
simulate the responses of queries made by randIND-UPD-CPA adversaryA. However in this case it is not
necessary for the reduction to be out-of-step with the adversary. B2.5 ﬁrst chooses b $← −{0, 1}.B2.5 forwards
all queries fromA to its own oracles, and when it receives challenge query (¯C0, ¯C1) fromA,B2.5 samples a
25
random message M, and sends (M, ¯Cb) to the randIND-UE-CPA challenger. The result follows using a similar
calculation to that in the proof of Theorem 2.3.
Theorem 2.6. Let UE = {UE.KG, UE.TG, UE.Enc, UE.Dec, UE.Upd} be an updatable encryption scheme
For any detIND-UPD-atk adversaryA against UE, where atk∈{ CPA, CCA}, there exists an detIND-UE-atk
adversaryB2.6 against UE such that
AdvdetIND-UPD-atk
UE,A (λ)≤ 2· AdvdetIND-UE-atk
UE,B2.6 (λ).
Proof. The proof follows exactly the same steps as that of Theorem 2.5, in addition to the observation that in
the det versions and CCA versions of the games, the trivial win ﬂag twf is either triggered for both adversary
and reduction or for neither whenO.Corr queries are made by the underlying adversary.
Theorem 2.7. Each of the following hold for (xx, atk)∈{ (det, CPA), (rand, CPA), (det, CCA)}.
(i). Let UE ={UE.KG, UE.TG, UE.Enc, UE.Dec, UE.Upd} be an updatable encryption scheme and let αENC
be the xxIND-ENC-atk advantage of an adversaryA against UE. Then there exists a modiﬁed scheme UE′ such
thatA’sxxIND-ENC-atk advantage against UE′ is (still)αENC, and there exists an xxIND-UE-atk adversaryB
against UE′ with advantage 1.
(ii). Let UE ={UE.KG, UE.TG, UE.Enc, UE.Dec, UE.Upd} be an updatable encryption scheme and let αUPD
be the xxIND-UPD-atk advantage of an adversaryA against UE. Then there exists a modiﬁed scheme UE′ such
thatA’sxxIND-UPD-atk advantage against UE′ is (still)αUPD, and there exists an xxIND-UE-atk adversaryB
against UE′ with advantage 1.
(iii). Let UE ={UE.KG, UE.TG, UE.Enc, UE.Dec, UE.Upd} be an updatable encryption scheme and letαENC
be the xxIND-ENC-atk advantage of an adversaryAENC against UE andαUPD be the xxIND-UPD-atk advan-
tage of an adversary . Then there exists a modiﬁed scheme UE′ such thatAENC’sxxIND-ENC-atk advantage
against UE′ is (still)αENC,AUPD’sxxIND-UPD-atk advantage against UE′ is (still)αUPD, and there exists an
xxIND-UE-atk adversaryB against UE′ with advantage 1.
Proof. All three are demonstrated using the same counterexample. All algorithms for UE′ are the same as
for UE, except UE′.Enc is deﬁned by modifying UE.Enc to append 0, and UE′.Upd is deﬁned by modifying
UE.Upd to append 1. Hence, freshly encrypted ciphertexts and updated ciphertexts are distinguishable. This
does not affect an adversary’s ability to win thexxIND-ENC-atk or xxIND-UPD-atk games but trivially breaks
xxIND-UE-atk security.
A remark on Theorem 2.8. We construct an updatable encryption scheme which is detIND-UE-CPA secure
but not randIND-UE-CPA secure to prove thatdetIND-UE-CPA does not imply randIND-UE-CPA. Note that in
Section 5 we will prove thatSHINE is detIND-UE-CPA secure (yet it is trivially notrandIND-UE-CPA secure),
which provides an example to support this result. However the proof that SHINE is detIND-UE-CPA in the
ideal cipher model (if DDH holds). Here we demonstrate the theorem based on a weaker assumption, namely
the existence of pseudorandom functions.
Proof technique of Theorem 2.8. We use axxIND-UE-CPAsecure UE scheme to construct a new UE scheme
UEnew, where we use a PRF to make a part of the new update algorithm deterministic. Because of this UEnew
will not be randIND-UE-CPA secure. In order to bound the detIND-UE-CPA security of UEnew, we need to
make sure the newly added deterministic part of the updates will not makeEnc(m) and Upd(C) distinguishable
– this is where we need the PRF.
Theorem 2.8. Let UE ={UE.KG, UE.TG, UE.Enc, UE.Dec, UE.Upd} be an updatable encryption scheme,
and deﬁne a new updatable encryption scheme UEnew in Fig. 22, built using pseudorandom function F :
K×X − →X. Then, for any detIND-UE-CPA adversaryA against UEnew that asks at most QE queries to
O.Enc before it makes its challenge, there exists a PRF adversaryBPRF against F and a detIND-UE-CPA
adversaryB2.8 against UE such that
AdvdetIND-UE-CPA
UEnew,A (λ)≤ (n + 1)· (AdvdetIND-UE-CPA
UE,B2.8 (λ) + 2· AdvPRF
F,BPRF + 2QE2
|X| ),
and there exists a randIND-UE-CPA adversaryC against UEnew that wins with probability 1.
26
UEnew.KG(λ)
1 : k
$
← −UE.KG(λ)
2 : return k
UEnew.TG(ke, ke+1)
3 : ∆ ′
e+1← UE.TG(ke, ke+1)
4 : fk e+1
$
← −K
5 : return (∆′
e+1, fke+1)
UEnew.Enc(ke, M)
6 : re
$
← −X
7 : C ′
e
$
← −UE.Enc(ke, M)
8 : return (re, C′
e)
UEnew.Dec(ke, Ce)
9 : parse Ce = (re, C′
e)
10 : M ′/⊥← UE.Dec(ke, C′
e)
11 : return M′
UEnew.Upd(∆e+1, Ce)
12 : parse ∆e+1 = (∆′
e+1, fke+1)
13 : parse Ce = (re, C′
e)
14 : re+1←F (fke+1,r e)
15 : C ′
e+1← UE.Upd(∆′
e+1, C′
e)
16 : return (re+1, C′
e+1)
Figure 22: Updatable encryption scheme UEnew for proof of Theorem 2.8, built from PRF F and updatable
encryption scheme UE.
Proof. UEnew is not randIND-UE-CPA secure. If the token in the challenge epoch is corrupted then the adver-
sary can compare r in the value it receives with the value it provided and therefore trivially win. So UEnew is
not randIND-UE-CPA secure.
UEnew is detIND-UE-CPA secure. We proceed in three steps.
(Step 1.) Consider a modiﬁed version of detIND-UE-CPA. For b∈{ 0, 1}, deﬁne experiments ExpINT1-b
to be the same as ExprandIND-UE-CPA-b except that the experiments randomly pick e∗←{ 0, ...,n}, and if
e∗⁄= ˜e the experiments return a random bit for b′. The loss is upper bounded byn + 1. Then:
AdvdetIND-UE-CPA
UEnew,A (λ)≤ (n + 1)· AdvINT1
UEnew,A(λ).
(Step 2.) Then we consider modiﬁed experiments ExpINT2-b, which are the same as ExpINT1-b except
that the ﬁrst element of ciphertexts in the guessed epoch e∗ is a uniformly random element. We show that
the ability to notice this change is upper bounded by PRF advantage. More precisely, experiment ExpINT2-b
tracks randomness in the setX (initialized as empty), and when adversary asks anO.Upd or challenge query:
• ForO.Upd(Ce∗-1): parse ∆e∗ = (∆′
e∗, ), parse Ce∗-1 = (re∗-1, C′
e∗-1), ifre∗-1∈X, then the experiment
aborts; otherwise, setX←X∪{re∗-1}, randomly choosere∗
$← −X. Return (re∗, UE.Upd(∆′
e∗, C′
e∗-1)).
• For challenge input ( ¯M, (r, ¯C)): parse ∆e∗ = (∆′
e∗, ), if e∗⁄= ˜e orr∈ X, then the experiment aborts;
otherwise, setX←X∪{r}. If b = 0, return UEnew.Enc(ke∗, ¯M). If b = 1, randomly choosere∗
$← −X,
return (re∗, UE.Upd(∆′
e∗, ¯C)).
Note that
AdvINT1
UEnew,A(λ) =
⏐⏐⏐Pr[ExpINT1-1
UEnew,A = 1]− Pr[ExpINT1-0
UEnew,A = 1]
⏐⏐⏐
≤ AdvINT2
UEnew,A(λ) +
⏐⏐⏐Pr[ExpINT2-1
UEnew,A = 1]− Pr[ExpINT1-1
UEnew,A = 1]
⏐⏐⏐
+
⏐⏐⏐Pr[ExpINT2-0
UEnew,A = 1]− Pr[ExpINT1-0
UEnew,A = 1]
⏐⏐⏐
For b∈{ 0, 1}, we wish to prove that
⏐⏐⏐Pr[ExpINT2-b
UEnew,A = 1]− Pr[ExpINT1-b
UEnew,A = 1]
⏐⏐⏐≤ AdvPRF
F + QE2
|X| .
SupposeA is an adversary trying to distinguishExpINT2-b
UEnew,A from ExpINT1-b
UEnew,A. We construct a PRF reduction
BPRF, detailed in Fig. 23, against F to simulate the responses of queries made byA.BPRF ﬁrst guesses when
A is going to ask a challenge query (assume e∗) and in that epochBPRF does bookkeeping for the randomness
inX (initialized as empty set). Note that the reduction generates all keys and tokens except for fke∗. Update
randomness in epoch e∗ is simulated by sending the randomness to the PRF challenger and forwarding the
response toA.
27
ReductionBPRF playing ExpPRF-b
F,BPRF
1 : do Setup
2 : ¯M, (r, ¯C)←AO.Enc,O.Next,O.Upd,O.Corr(λ)
3 : phase← 1
4 : Create ˜C with ( ¯M, (r, ¯C)), get ˜Ce∗
5 : b ′←AO.Enc,O.Next,O.Upd,O.Corr,O.Upd˜C(˜Ce∗)
6 : twf← 1 if
7 : C∗∩K∗⁄=∅ or I∗∩C∗⁄=∅
8 : if ABORT occurred or twf = 1
9 : b ′ $
← −{0, 1}
10 : return b′
11 : if b′ = b
12 : return 0
13 : else
14 : return 1
Setup(λ)
15 : k 0← UE.KG(λ)
16 : ∆ 0←⊥; e← 0; phase, twf← 0
17 : e∗ $
← −{0, ...,n}
18 : L, ˜L,C,K,T,X ←∅
O.Next†
O.Upd(re−1, C′
e−1)
19 : if (·, (re−1, C′
e−1), e− 1)⁄∈L
20 : return ⊥
21 : if e⁄= e∗
22 : C e← UEnew.Upd((∆′
e, fke), (re−1, C′
e−1))
23 : if e = e∗
24 : if re−1∈X
25 : return ABORT
26 : X←X∪{re−1}
27 : re←O.f(re−1) / /embed
28 : C ′
e← UE.Upd(∆′
e, C′
e−1)
29 : C e← (re, C′
e)
30 : L←L∪{ (·, Ce, e)}
31 : return Ce
Create ˜C with ( ¯M, (r, ¯C))
32 : if (·, (r, ¯C), ˜e− 1)⁄∈L or e∗⁄= ˜e orr∈X
33 : return ⊥
34 : X←X∪{r}
35 : if b = 0
36 : ˜C˜e← UEnew.Enc(k˜e, ¯M)
37 : else
38 : r˜e←O.f(r) / /embed
39 : ˜C′
˜e← UE.Upd(∆′
˜e, ¯C)
40 : ˜C˜e← (r˜e, ˜C′
˜e)
41 : return ˜C˜e
Figure 23: Reduction BPRF for proof of Theorem 2.8,BPRF simulatesO.Enc,O.Next,O.Corr andO.Upd ˜C
queries as described in Fig. 6. Recall that the PRF advantage in Deﬁnition 3, O.f replies with F(k,r ) or a
random value.† indicates fke∗ are skipped in the generation.
EventuallyBPRF receives the guess fromA, and outputs 0 ifA guesses that it is in ExpINT1-b, and 1 ifA
guesses that it is in ExpINT2-b.
WhenBPRF interacts with ExpPRF-0, it can simulate ExpINT1-b perfectly except with a negligible prob-
ability. The negligible term is due to BPRF aborts the game. Since the number of existed randomnesses is
small compared to the number of possible random elements, the probability thatBPRF aborts the game is upper
bounded by QE2
|X| . WhenBPRF interacts with ExpPRF-1, it can perfectly simulate ExpINT2-b, thus we have the
required result.
(Step 3.) Now we conclude that the advantage of winning INT2 is upper bounded by detIND-UE-CPA ad-
vantage (against UE). Suppose an INT2 adversaryA is trying to attack UEnew. We construct a detIND-UE-CPA
reductionB2.8, detailed in Fig. 24, attacking UE and runsA.B2.8 ﬁrst guesses whenA is going to ask a chal-
lenge query (assume e∗) and in that epochB2.8 does bookkeeping for the randomness inX (initialized as empty
set).
EventuallyB2.8 receives b′ fromA, and simply outputs b′. ThenB2.8 perfectly simulates ExpINT2-b toA.
We have the required result
AdvINT2
UEnew,A(λ)≤ AdvdetIND-UE-CPA
UE,B2.8 (λ).
28
ReductionB2.8 playing ExpdetIND-UE-CPA
UE,B2.8
1 : do Setup
2 : ¯M, (r, ¯C)←AO.Enc,O.Next,O.Upd,O.Corr(λ)
3 : phase← 1
4 : Create ˜C with ( ¯M, (r, ¯C)), get ˜Ce∗
5 : b ′←AO.Enc,O.Next,O.Upd,O.Corr,O.Upd˜C(˜Ce∗)
6 : twf← 1 if
7 : C∗∩K∗⁄=∅ or I∗∩C∗⁄=∅
8 : if ABORT occurred or twf = 1
9 : b ′ $
← −{0, 1}
10 : return b′
Setup(λ)
11 : k 0← UE.KG(λ)
12 : ∆ 0←⊥; e← 0; phase, twf← 0
13 : e∗ $
← −{0, ...,n}
14 : L, ˜L,C,K,T,X ←∅
O.Enc(M)
15 : callO.Enc(M), get C′
16 : r
$
← −X
17 : return (r, C′)
O.Next
18 : callO.Next
19 : fk e+1
$
← −K
20 : if phase = 1
21 : ˜ re+1 =F (fke+1, ˜re)
22 : ˜L← ˜L∪{ ((˜re+1,·), e + 1)}
O.Upd((re−1, C′
e−1))
23 : if (·, (re−1, C′
e−1), e− 1)⁄∈L
24 : return ⊥
25 : callO.Upd(C′
e−1), get C′
e
26 : if e⁄= e∗
27 : re =F (fke,r )
28 : if e = e∗
29 : if re−1∈X
30 : return ABORT
31 : X←X∪{re−1}
32 : re
$
← −X
33 : L←L∪{ (·, (re, C′
e), e)}
34 : return (re, C′
e)
O.Corr(inp, ˆe)
35 : callO.Corr(inp, ˆe), get⊥ or kˆe or ∆′
ˆe
36 : return ⊥ or kˆe or (∆′
ˆe, fkˆe)
Create ˜C with ( ¯M, (r, ¯C))
37 : if (·, (r, ¯C), ˜e− 1)⁄∈L or e∗⁄= ˜e orr∈X
38 : return ⊥
39 : X←X∪{r}
40 : call cq with ( ¯M, ¯C), get ˜C′ / /embed
41 : ˜r˜e
$
← −X
42 : ˜L← ˜L∪{ ((˜r˜e, ˜C′), ˜e)}
43 : return (˜r˜e, ˜C′)
O.Upd ˜C
44 : callO.Upd ˜C, get ˜C′
e / /embed
45 : ˜L← ˜L∪{ ((˜re, ˜C′
e), e)}
46 : return (˜re, ˜C′
e)
Figure 24: ReductionB2.8 for proof of Theorem 2.8. In line 40 of the Create ˜C description, call cq means that
the reduction makes its own challenge query with these values.
4.2.3 Relation among CPA, CTXT and CCA Security
Theorem 3. Let UE ={UE.KG, UE.TG, UE.Enc, UE.Dec, UE.Upd} be an updatable encryption scheme. For
any detIND-yy-CCA adversaryA against UE, there exists anINT-CTXT adversaryB3a and an detIND-yy-CPA
adversaryB3b against UE such that
AdvdetIND-yy-CCA
UE,A (λ)≤ 2AdvINT-CTXT
UE,B3a (λ) + AdvdetIND-yy-CPA
UE,B3b
(λ)
where yy∈{ UE, ENC, UPD}.
We now prove Theorem 3, which states that the combination of detIND-yy-CPA security and INT-CTXT
security yields detIND-yy-CCA, for yy∈{ UE, ENC, UPD}. The proof proceeds via a single game hop.
29
Proof. Game 0
The ﬁrst game is the experiment ExpdetIND-yy-CCA
UE,A , given in Fig. 11 (or Fig. 12 or Fig. 17). From Def. 5 (or
Def. 6 or Def. 8) we have
AdvdetIND-yy-CCA
UE,A (λ) = 2
⏐⏐⏐Pr[G0 = 1]− 1/2
⏐⏐⏐.
Game 1
In this game we introduce an event bad that is triggered if the adversary asks its decryption oracle for some-
thing that would count as a forgery, and then show that the success probability of a distinguisher between the
two games is bounded by INT-CTXT. Then, we bound the success probability in this modiﬁed game by an
adversary against detIND-yy-CCA. We modifyO.Dec, such that the boxed statements only run in Game 1:
O.Dec(C)
1 : if phase← 1 and C∈ ˜L∗
2 : return ⊥
3 : M /⊥← UE.Dec(ke, C)
4 : if C /∈L∗ and M′⁄=⊥
5 : bad← true
6 : return⊥
We have
⏐⏐⏐Pr[G0 = 1]− 1/2
⏐⏐⏐≤
⏐⏐⏐Pr[G0 = 1]− Pr[G1 = 1]
⏐⏐⏐ +
⏐⏐⏐Pr[G1 = 1]− 1/2
⏐⏐⏐
We claim that there exists an INT-CTXT adversaryB3a against UE such that
⏐⏐⏐Pr[G0 = 1]− Pr[G1 = 1]
⏐⏐⏐≤ AdvINT-CTXT
UE,B3a (λ),
and there exists an detIND-yy-CPA adversaryB3b such that
2
⏐⏐⏐Pr[G1 = 1]− 1/2
⏐⏐⏐≤ AdvdetIND-yy-CPA
UE,B3b
(λ).
Claim 1. ⏐⏐⏐Pr[G0 = 1]− Pr[G1 = 1]
⏐⏐⏐ = Pr[bad = true inG1] = AdvINT-CTXT
UE,B3a (λ).
We construct a reductionB3a playing INT-CTXT that simulates the environment of G1 toA. B3a starts
by picking a random bit b, then runs A answering its queries as follows. For a challenge query with input
(˜C0 or ¯M0, ˜C1 or ¯M1). If b =0,B3a sends ˜C0 (or ¯M0) to itsO.Upd (orO.Enc); b =1,B3a sends ˜C1 (or ¯M1) to
itsO.Upd (orO.Enc); eventually, returns the response toA. Furthermore,B3a simulatesO.Upd ˜C by sending
the challenge ciphertext toO.Upd, and forwards the response toA.
For a decryption queryO.Dec with input C: If C∈L∗,B3a checks the corresponding message in listL∗
(adversaryB3a does bookkeeping for this list and additionally stores message in this list, list is updated by
O.Enc,O.Upd,O.Corr. Hence this simulation is feasible by an INT-CTXT adversary.), and returns it toA. If
C /∈L∗,B3a returns⊥ toA, and sends C to itsO.Try oracle.
B3a perfectly simulatesG1. Notice that G0 andG1 are identical until UE.Dec(ke, C)⁄=⊥ and C /∈L ∗
happens (which causes bad = true inG1): denote this event to be E. Thus, we have
⏐⏐⏐Pr[G0 = 1]− Pr[G1 =
1]
⏐⏐⏐ = Pr[bad = true inG1] = Pr[E]. If event E happens, which results in win = 1 in the INT-CTXT game,
that means C is a valid forgery in INT-CTXT game. So Pr[E] = AdvINT-CTXT
UE,B3a (λ).
Claim 2.
2
⏐⏐⏐Pr[G1 = 1]− 1/2
⏐⏐⏐≤ AdvdetIND-yy-CPA
UE,B3b
(λ).
We only need to consider how the detIND-yy-CPA adversaryB3b simulates theO.Dec oracle. Since B3b
knows ˜L∗ andL∗, wheneverA asksO.Dec with C,B3b checks if C∈ ˜L∗ or C /∈L∗, and if so, responds⊥.
30
Otherwise,B3b checks the corresponding message in listL∗ (adversaryB3b does bookkeeping for this list and
additionally stores message in this list as well, list is updated byO.Enc,O.Upd,O.Corr. Hence this simulation
is feasible by an detIND-yy-CPA adversary), and returns it toA.
5 The SHINE Schemes
We now describe our new UE scheme SHINE (Secure Homomorphic Ideal-cipher Nonce-based Encryption).
The encryption algorithm uses a permutation to obfuscate the input to the exponentiation function. Updating a
ciphertext simply requires exponentiation once by the update token, which itself is the quotient of the current
epoch key and the previous epoch key. The scheme comes in three ﬂavors: SHINE0 is presented in Fig. 25
and takes in short messages and only uses a single permutation. The second ﬂavor, MirrorSHINE, is provided
in Fig. 26 and runs two different permutations with the same input. The third ﬂavor OCBSHINE is given in
Fig. 28 and is for applications with arbitrarily long messages, using a family of permutations.
We discuss implementation details of the SHINE schemes in Section 5.6. In particular, for each scheme
in the SHINE suite, it is necessary to embed the output of the permutation (a regular block cipher) into an
appropriate DDH-hard group.
Our proofs of security, given as Theorem 4 for conﬁdentiality and Theorem 5 for integrity, bound an adver-
sary’sdetIND-UE-CPA (INT-CTXTs) advantage by DDH (CDH), and are provided in the ideal cipher model.
Furthermore, combining the results of Theorem 3, Theorem 4 and Theorem 5, we have that the suite of SHINE
schemes (i.e. SHINE0, MirrorSHINE and OCBSHINE) are detIND-UE-CCA secure.
5.1 Construction of SHINE Schemes
5.1.1 SHINE via Zero Block: SHINE0.
Suppose a message space ofMS ={0, 1}m and random nonce spaceN ={0, 1}v. The encryption algorithm
feeds as input to the permutation a nonce, the message, and a zero string. The decryption algorithm will return
⊥ if the decrypted value does not end with0t. The SHINE0 scheme is deﬁned in Fig. 25. If ciphertext integrity
is not required (or ﬁle/ciphertext integrity is performed in some other manner), then SHINE0 without the zero
block results in a scheme (denoted SHINE0[CPA]) that is still detIND-UE-CPA secure.
SHINE0.KG(λ)
1 : k
$
← −Z∗
q
2 : return k
SHINE0.TG(ke, ke+1)
3 : ∆ e+1← ke+1
ke
4 : return ∆e+1
SHINE0.Enc(ke, M)
5 : N
$
← −N
6 : C e← (π(N‖M‖0t))ke
7 : return Ce
SHINE0.Dec(ke, Ce)
8 : a←π−1(C1/ke
e )
9 : parse†a as N′‖M′‖Z
10 : if Z = 0t
11 : return M′
12 : else
13 : return ⊥
SHINE0.Upd(∆e+1, Ce)
14 : C e+1← (Ce)∆e+1
15 : return Ce+1
Figure 25: Updatable encryption scheme SHINE0. Note that there may be an additional embedding step after
the permutationπ, as discussed in Section 5.6.†:‖N′‖ = v,‖M′‖ = m,‖Z‖ = t.
31
5.1.2 SHINE via Double Encryption: MirrorSHINE
The construction of MirrorSHINE is similar to SHINE0, except that instead of padding a zero block after
the message, the encryption algorithm processes each message and nonce twice using two different random
permutations. For authentication, we compare if two ciphertext blocks have the same underlying message and
nonce. The idea of the authentication is similar toSHINE0, however here we use the difference of the underlying
message and nonce as the “zero block”. Compared to SHINE0, MirrorSHINE does one more exponentiation in
both encryption and update and requires two ciphertext elements per message, but larger messages are supported
(when using the same – for example standardized – group).
MirrorSHINE.KG(λ)
1 : k
$
← −Z∗
q
2 : return k
MirrorSHINE.TG(ke, ke+1)
3 : ∆ e+1← ke+1
ke
4 : return ∆e+1
MirrorSHINE.Enc(ke, M)
5 : N
$
← −N
6 : C 1
e← (π1(N||M))ke
7 : C 2
e← (π2(N||M))ke
8 : C e← (C1
e, C2
e)
9 : return Ce
MirrorSHINE.Dec(ke, Ce)
10 : parse Ce = (C1
e, C2
e)
11 : a1←π−1
1 ((C1
e)1/ke)
12 : a2←π−1
2 ((C2
e)1/ke)
13 : parse‡a1 as N′||M′
14 : if a1 =a2
15 : return M′
16 : else
17 : return ⊥
MirrorSHINE.Upd(∆e+1, Ce)
18 : parse Ce = (C1
e, C2
e)
19 : C 1
e+1← (C1
e)∆e+1
20 : C 2
e+1← (C2
e)∆e+1
21 : return C1
e+1, C2
e+1
Figure 26: Updatable encryption scheme MirrorSHINE, whereπ1,π 2 are two different random permutations.
Note that there may be an additional embedding step after the permutations π1 andπ2, as discussed in Sec-
tion 5.6.‡:‖N′‖ = v,‖M′‖ = m.
5.1.3 SHINE for Long Messages via Checksum: OCBSHINE.
The schemes SHINE0 and MirrorSHINE both require that the message space be smaller than the size of an
element of the exponentiation group. This ciphertext expansion is undesirable in many practical scenarios, and
so we wish to construct a SHINE scheme which gives us (almost) no ciphertext expansion and can be applied
to arbitrarily long messages. We build a new SHINE scheme, OCBSHINE, with these properties.
The construction of OCBSHINE is inspired by the authenticated encryption scheme OCB [RBBK01]. Dif-
ferent from OCB mode, the nonce is encrypted inside the ciphertext instead of sending it along with the ci-
phertext. In order to determine the length of the last message block, the encryption algorithm of OCB mode
removes some bits of the last ciphertext block to reveal this information. However in our setting, the output of
the permutations are (mapped to) the input of the exponentiation function: thus all bits of permutation outputs
must be included. Therefore, OCBSHINE includes the length of the last message block in the ﬁrst ciphertext
component. If ciphertext integrity is not required, then OCBSHINE can be improved by removing the last
ciphertext block.
OCBSHINE is formally deﬁned in Fig. 28 and the encryption process is pictorially represented in Fig. 27;
we give an intuitive description here. Suppose the blocksize is m, and assume the encryption algorithm
OCBSHINE.Enc has input messageM. By “partitionM into M1, ..., Ml” we mean settingl← max{⌈|M|/m⌉, 1}
and dividing M intol blocks, i.e. M1, ..., Ml, where|M1| = ... =|Ml−1| =m. The last message block Ml is
padded with zeros to make it length m before computing the permutation output and the checksum, i.e Ml‖0∗
with|Ml‖0∗| =m. Leta =⌈log(m)⌉, so the length ofMl (|Ml|≤ m) can be written as ana-bit representation.
32
N‖|M3| M1 M2 M3‖0∗ Σ
π0 πN‖1‖0 πN‖2‖0 πN‖3‖0 πN‖3‖1
Expke Expke Expke Expke Expke
C0 C1 C2 C3 C4
Figure 27: Diagram describing how the OCBSHINE encryption algorithm works on message M =
(M1, M2, M3). Σ = M1⊕ M2⊕ M3‖0∗. There may be an additional embedding step after the permutations,
as discussed in Section 5.6.
Let Perm(m) be the set of all permutations on {0, 1}m. Randomly choose π0
$← −Perm(m), and use this
permutation to randomize the concatenation of the nonce N and an a-bit representation of the last message
block length. Then, index the (random) permutations used to encrypt message blocks by the nonce and a
counter. Let Perm (S,m ) be the set of all mappings from S to permutations on{0, 1}m. Suppose the nonce
space isN ={0, 1}m−a,S =N× N∗×{0, 1}, for each(N∈N ,i∈ N∗,b∈{ 0, 1}), setπN‖i‖b
$← −Perm(N×
N∗×{ 0, 1},m ), which form a random permutation family: we use these permutations to randomize message
blocks and the checksum.
OCBSHINE.KG(λ)
1 : k
$
← −Z∗
q
2 : return k
OCBSHINE.TG(ke, ke+1)
3 : ∆ e+1← ke+1
ke
4 : return ∆e+1
OCBSHINE.Enc(ke, M)
5 : partition M into M 1, ..., Ml
6 : Σ ←⊕ l-1
i=1Mi⊕ Ml‖0∗
7 : N
$
← −N
8 : C 0←
(
π0(N‖|Ml|)
)ke
9 : C l+1←
(
πN‖l‖1(Σ)
)ke
10 : fori = 1, ...,l -1 do
11 : C i←
(
πN‖i‖0(Mi)
)ke
12 : C l←
(
πN‖l‖0(Ml‖0∗)
)ke
13 : C e← (C0, ..., Cl, Cl+1)
14 : return Ce
OCBSHINE.Dec(ke, Ce)
15 : parse Ce = (C0, ..., Cl, Cl+1)
16 : N ′‖A′←π−1
0 (
(
C0)1/ke
)
17 : Σ ′←π−1
N′‖l‖1(
(
Cl+1)1/ke
)
18 : fori = 1, ...,l do
19 : M ′
i←π−1
N′‖i‖0(
(
Ci)1/ke
)
20 : if Σ′ =⊕l
i=1M′
i
21 : M ′← (M′
1, ..., M′
l[x])
22 : return M′
23 : else
24 : return ⊥
OCBSHINE.Upd(∆e+1, Ce)
25 : parse Ce = (C0, ..., Cl, Cl+1)
26 : fori = 0, ...,l + 1 do
27 : C i
e+1← (Ci
e)∆e+1
28 : return Ce+1
Figure 28: Updatable encryption scheme OCBSHINE. Note that there may be an additional embedding step
after the permutations, as discussed in Section 5.6. In line 21, Ml[x] represents the ﬁrstA′ bits of Ml.
33
5.2 Security - SHINE is detIND-UE-CPA, INT-CTXT, detIND-UE-CCA Secure
All three SHINE schemes, i.e. SHINE0, MirrorSHINE and OCBSHINE, have the same security properties, and
the proofs are very similar for each ﬂavor. We refer to SHINE to mean the family containing all these three
schemes. In Theorem 4, we show that SHINE is detIND-UE-CPA in the ideal cipher model, if DDH holds.
In Theorem 5, we show that SHINE is INT-CTXTs, and therefore INT-CTXT (INT-CTXT and INT-CTXTs
are equivalent, recall Section 3), in the ideal cipher model, if CDH holds. The loss incurred by this proof is
the normal (n + 1)3 (or (n + 1)2 for INT-CTXT) and also the number of encryption queries the adversary
makes before it makes its challenge: to avoid the issues described in Section 5.3 we not only need to guess the
locations of the challenge ﬁrewalls but also the ciphertext that the adversary will submit as its challenge.
The ideal cipher model, a version of which was initially given by Shannon [Sha49] and shown to be equiv-
alent to the random oracle model by Coron et al. [CPS08], gives all parties access to a permutation chosen ran-
domly from all possible key-permutation possibilities of appropriate length. The SHINE schemes exponentiate
the output of the permutation by the epoch key to encrypt, so our reduction can ‘program’ the transformation
from permutation outputs to group elements.
In the following two Theorems we detail the security properties met by SHINE, i.e. detIND-UE-CPA,
INT-CTXT and thus detIND-UE-CCA. Note that this is the strongest known security property for updatable
encryption schemes with deterministic updates. In Section 5.3 we discuss the challenges that arise in the proofs
of these two theorems, and in Section 5.4 and Section 5.5 we describe the novel techniques and methods used
in the proofs.
Theorem 4 (SHINE is detIND-UE-CPA). Let SHINE ∈ {SHINE0, MirrorSHINE, OCBSHINE} be the UE
scheme described in Fig. 25 (or Fig. 26 or Fig. 28). For any ideal cipher model adversary A (that makes max
QE encryption queries before its challenge), there exists an adversaryB4 such that
AdvdetIND-UE-CPA
SHINE,A (λ)≤O(1)(n + 1)3· QE· AdvDDH
G,B4(λ).
This is proven via Theorem 4.1, and Theorem 4.3 and Theorem 4.4 in Section 5.4.
Theorem 5 (SHINE is INT-CTXTs). Let SHINE∈{ SHINE0, MirrorSHINE, OCBSHINE} be the UE scheme
described in Fig. 25 (or Fig. 26 or Fig. 28).For any ideal cipher model adversary A (that makes max QE
encryption queries before callingO.Try), there exists an adversaryB5 such that
AdvINT-CTXTs
SHINE,A (λ)≤O(1)(n + 1)2· QE· AdvCDH
B5 + negligible terms
This is proven via Theorem 5.1, and Theorem 5.3 and Theorem 5.4 in Section 5.5.
Remark 5. Combining the results of Theorem 3, Theorem 4 and Theorem 5, we have thatSHINE is detIND-UE-CCA.
Remark 6. Proofs for SHINE0 are extendable to MirrorSHINE and OCBSHINE, so we only show full proof
details of Theorem 4.1 and Theorem 5.1 in Section 5.4 and Section 5.5, respectively.
5.3 Proof Challenges in Schemes with Deterministic Updates
In each variant of SHINE all ciphertext components are raised to the epoch key, so the update mechanism
transforms a ciphertext for epoche to one fore+1 by raising this value toke+1
ke . We now highlight the difﬁculties
in creating security proofs for such ‘single-component’ updatable encryption schemes. Randomness is used in
creation of the initial ciphertext (via N) but updates are completely deterministic, and thus in any reduction
it is necessary to provide consistent ciphertexts to the adversary (i.e. the N value must be consistent). The
(cryptographic) separation gained by using the ﬁrewall technique (see Section 3.3 for discussion and deﬁnition)
assists with producing (updates of) non-challenge ciphertexts, but embedding any challenge value while also
providing answers to theO.Corr queries of the underlying adversary is very challenging.
The regular key insulation technique as introduced by LT18 – where the reduction constructs one hybrid
for each epoch – does not work. Speciﬁcally, in any reduction to a DDH-like assumption, it is not possible to
provide a challenge ciphertext in a left or right sense (to the left of this challenge ciphertext are of some form,
and to the right of this challenge ciphertext are of some other form) if the underlying adversary asks for tokens
34
around the challenge epoch: deterministic updates mean that tokens will make these ciphertexts of the same
form and this gap will be easily distinguishable.
We counteract this problem by constructing ahybrid argument across insulated regions. This means that in
each hybrid, we can embed at one ﬁrewall of the insulated region, and simulate all tokens within that insulated
region to enable answering queries to both O.Upd andO.Upd ˜C. The reduction’s distinguishing task is thus
ensured to be at the boundaries of the insulated regions, the ﬁrewalls, so any (non-trivial) win for the underlying
adversary is ensured to carry through directly to the reduction.
5.4 SHINE is detIND-UE-CPA
We now explain how we bound the advantage of any adversary playing the detIND-UE-CPA game for SHINE
by the advantage of a reduction playing DDH.
Proof Method for Conﬁdentiality: Constructing a Hybrid Argument across Insulated Regions. No-
tice that the non-corrupted key space is the union set of all insulated regions, i.e. {0, 1, ...,n}\K ∗ =
∪(j,fwlj ,fwrj)∈FW{fwlj, ..., fwrj}. If the trivial win conditions are not triggered and the adversary knows a
challenge-equal ciphertext in some epoch within an insulated region, then since the adversary knows all to-
kens in that insulated region, the adversary will know all challenge-equal ciphertexts in that insulated region.
Then we have
C∗ =∪(j,fwlj ,fwrj)∈S⊆FW{fwlj, ..., fwrj},
whereS is a subset of ﬁrewall listFW .
We apply the ﬁrewall technique to set up hybrid games such that in hybrid i, we embed within the i-th
insulated region: this means that to the left of the i-th insulated region the game responds with the b = 1
case of the detIND-UE-CPA experiment, and to the right of the i-th insulated region it gives an encryption of
the challenge input message as output, i.e. b = 0 . This means we have one hybrid for each insulated region,
moving left-to-right across the epoch space.
We construct a reductionB playing the DDH experiment in hybrid i. Initially, B guesses the location of
thei-th insulated region. If the underlying adversary has performed a corrupt query within this insulated region
that would lead to the reduction failing, the reduction aborts the game. We use the algorithm Check described
in Fig. 29 to check if this event happens.
Check(inp, ˆe; e; fwl, fwr)
1 : if ˆe> e
2 : return ⊥
3 : if inp = key and ˆe∈{ fwl, ..., fwr}
4 : return ABORT
5 : if inp = token and ˆe∈{ fwl, fwr+1}
6 : return ABORT
Figure 29: Algorithm Check, used in proofs in this section. In Check, ˆe is the epoch in the adversary’s request,
and e is the current epoch.
In particular, within the insulated region, the reduction can simulate challenge ciphertexts and non-challenge
ciphertexts using its DDH tuple. Furthermore, ciphertexts can be moved around within the insulated region by
tokens.
Remark 7. We note that the problem of challenge insulation in schemes with deterministic updates was also
observed independently by Klooß et al. [[KLR19b], § B.2]. Their solution (though in the different context of
CCA security of UE with certain properties) is to form a hybrid argument with a hybrid for each epoch, and
essentially guess an epochr which is the ﬁrst token ‘after’ the hybrid index that the adversary has not corrupted,
and use the inherent ‘gap’ in the adversary’s knowledge continuum to replace challenge updates across this gap
with encryptions of just one of the challenge messages. It is not clear if this approach would work for showing
detIND-UE-CPA (or IND-ENC-CPA) of SHINE. We conjecture that even if it were possible to construct a
35
reduction in this vein, our approach enables a more direct proof: in particular we do not need to assume speciﬁc
additional properties of the UE scheme in question for it to work.
SHINE0 is detIND-UE-CPA.
Theorem 4.1 (SHINE0 is detIND-UE-CPA). Let G be a group of orderq (aλ-bit prime) with generatorg, and
let SHINE0 be the updatable encryption scheme described in Fig. 25. For any detIND-UE-CPA adversaryA
against SHINE0 that asks at most QE queries toO.Enc before it makes its challenge, there exists an adversary
B4.1 against DDH such that
AdvdetIND-UE-CPA
SHINE0,A (λ)≤ 2(n + 1)3· QE· AdvDDH
G,B4.1(λ).
Proof. Play hybrid games. We begin by partitioning non-corrupted key space as follows:{0, 1, ...,n}\K ∗ =
∪(j,fwlj ,fwrj)∈FW{fwlj, ..., fwrj}, where fwri and fwri are ﬁrewalls of the i-th insulated region. Recall the
deﬁnition from Section 3.3 and ﬁrewall computing algorithm FW-Find in Fig. 15: fwli, fwri are ﬁrewalls of the
i-th insulated region if (i, fwli, fwri)∈FW .
For b∈{ 0, 1}, deﬁne gameGb
i as ExpdetIND-UE-CPA-b
SHINE0,A except for:
• The game randomly picks an integer h, and if the challenge input ¯C is not an updated ciphertext of the
h-thO.Enc query, it (aborts and) returns a random bit for b′. This loss is upper-bounded by QE.
• The game randomly picks fwli, fwri
$← −{0, ...,n} and if fwli, fwri are not the i-th ﬁrewalls, returns a
random bit for b′. This loss is upper-bounded by (n + 1)2.
• For the challenge (made in epoch ˜e, input ( ¯M, ¯C)): If ˜e < fwli then return a ciphertext with respect to
¯C, if ˜e > fwri return a ciphertext with ¯M, and if fwli≤ ˜e≤ fwri then return a ciphertext with ¯M when
b = 0, return a ciphertext with respect to ¯C when b = 1.
• AfterA outputs b′, returns b′ if twf⁄= 1 or some additional trivial win condition triggers.
If h, fwli, fwri are the desired values, then G0
1 is ExpdetIND-UE-CPA-0
SHINE0,A , i.e. all challenges are encryptions
of ¯M. And there exists some l (the total number of insulated regions, bounded by n + 1), game G1
l is
ExpdetIND-UE-CPA-1
SHINE0,A , i.e. all challenges are updates of ¯C. Let E to be the event that h, fwli, fwri are the desired
values, notice that Pr[Gb
i = 1|¬E] = 1
2 for any 1≤i≤n + 1 and b∈{ 0, 1}. Then
Pr[G1
l = 1] = Pr[G1
l = 1|E]· Pr[E] + Pr[G1
l = 1|¬E]· Pr[¬E]
= Pr[ExpdetIND-UE-CPA-1
SHINE0,A = 1]· 1
(n + 1)2QE
+ 1
2· (1− 1
(n + 1)2QE
), and
Pr[G0
1 = 1] = Pr[ExpdetIND-UE-CPA-0
SHINE0,A = 1]· 1
(n + 1)2QE
+ 1
2· (1− 1
(n + 1)2QE
)
Thus we have that
⏐⏐Pr[G1
l = 1]− Pr[G0
1 = 1]
⏐⏐ = 1
(n + 1)2QE
·
⏐⏐⏐Pr[ExpdetIND-UE-CPA-1
SHINE0,A = 1]− Pr[ExpdetIND-UE-CPA-0
SHINE0,A = 1]
⏐⏐⏐
= 1
(n + 1)2QE
· AdvdetIND-UE-CPA
SHINE0,A (λ)
Notice that all queries in G1
i−1 andG0
i have the equal responses: for the challenge query and O.Upd ˜C, if
called in epoch in ﬁrst i− 1 insulated regions, the reduction returns a ciphertext with respect to ¯C, otherwise
returns an encryption of ¯M. Therefore, for any l(≤ n + 1),|Pr[G1
l = 1]− Pr[G0
1 = 1]|≤ ∑l
i=1|Pr[G1
i =
1]− Pr[G0
i = 1]|. We prove that for any 1≤ i≤ l,|Pr[G1
i = 1]− Pr[G0
i = 1]|≤ 2AdvDDH
G, (λ). We only
prove one of thesel hybrids, the rest can be similarly proven.
In hybridi. Suppose thatAi is an adversary attempting to distinguishG0
i fromG1
i . For all queries concerning
epochs outside of the i-th insulated region the responses will be equal in either game, so we assume that Ai
asks for at least one challenge ciphertext in an epoch within the i-th insulated region (then [fwli, fwri]⊆C ∗)
and this is where we will embed DDH tuples in our reduction.
36
We construct a reductionB4.1, detailed in Fig. 30, that is playing the standard DDH game and will simulate
the responses of queries made by adversaryAi.
ReductionB4.1 playing ExpDDH
G,B4.1
1 : receive (g,X,Y,Z )
2 : do Setup
3 : ¯M, ¯C←A ors(λ)
4 : phase← 1
5 : Create ˜C with ( ¯M, ¯C), get ˜C˜e
6 : b ′←A ors,O.Upd˜C(˜C˜e)
7 : twf← 1 if
8 : C∗∩K∗⁄=∅ or
9 : I∗∩C∗⁄=∅
10 : if ABORT occurred or twf = 1
11 : b ′ $
← −{0, 1}
12 : return b′
13 : if (i, fwli, fwri)⁄∈FW
14 : b ′ $
← −{0, 1}
15 : return b′
16 : if b′ = b
17 : return 0
18 : else
19 : return 1
Setup(λ)
20 : b
$
← −{0, 1}
21 : k 0← SHINE0.KG(λ)
22 : ∆ 0←⊥
23 : e, c, phase, twf← 0
24 : L, ˜L,C,K,T ←∅
25 : fwli, fwri
$
← −{0, ...,n}
26 : h
$
← −{1, ..., QE}
27 : forj∈{0, ..., fwli-1} do
28 : k j
$
← −Z∗
q; ∆j← kj
kj−1
⊿ ◁
29 : PKj←gkj
Setup(λ) cont.
33 : forj∈{ fwri+1, ...,n} do
34 : k j
$
← −Z∗
q; ∆j← kj
kj−1
⊿ ◁
35 : PKj←gkj
36 : if b = 0
37 : PKfwli←Y ; C
$
← −G
38 : else
39 : PKfwli←Y kfwli−1; C←X
40 : forj∈{ fwli+1, ..., fwri} do
41 : ∆ j
$
← −Z∗
q; PKj← PK∆j
j−1
O.Enc(M)
39 : c← c + 1
40 : if c = h
41 : C e← C; inf← e
42 : else
43 : inf
$
← −Z∗
q
44 : π(N||M)←ginf
45 : C e← PKinf
e
46 : L←L∪{ (c, Ce, e; inf)}
47 : return Ce
O.Next
48 : e← e + 1
O.Upd(Ce−1)
49 : if (c, Ce−1, e− 1; inf)⁄∈L
50 : return ⊥
51 : if c = h
52 : C e← C∆e
e−1
53 : else
54 : C e← PKinf
e
55 : L←L∪{ (c, Ce, e; inf)}
56 : return Ce
O.Corr(inp, ˆe)
57 : do Check(inp, ˆe; e; fwli, fwri)
58 : if inp = key
59 : K←K∪{ ˆe}
60 : return kˆe
61 : if inp = token
62 : T ←T ∪{ˆe}
63 : return ∆ˆe
Create ˜C with ( ¯M, ¯C)
64 : if (h, ¯C, ˜e− 1; inf) /∈L
65 : return ABORT
66 : if b = 0
67 : π(N|| ¯M)←X; ˜Cfwli←Z
68 : else
69 : π(N|| ¯M)
$
← −G
70 : ˜Cfwli←Z
∏fwli−1
j=inf+1 ∆j
71 : forj∈{ 0, ..., fwli− 1} do
72 : ˜Cj← ¯C(∏j
k=0 ∆k)/(∏˜e−1
k=0 ∆k) / /left
73 : forj∈{ fwli + 1, ..., fwri} do
74 : ˜Cj← ˜C∆j
j−1 / /embed
75 : forj∈{ fwri + 1, ...,n} do
76 : ˜Cj← (π(N|| ¯M))kj / /right
77 : ˜L←∪ n
j=0{(˜Cj,j )}
78 : return ˜C˜e
O.Upd ˜C
79 : C←C∪{ e}
80 : ﬁnd(˜Ce, e)∈ ˜L
81 : return ˜Ce
Figure 30: Reduction B4.1 for proof of Theorem 4.1, in hybrid i. Moving left-to-right through embedding
DDH tuples in the i-th insulated region: when b = 1 , embedding DDH tuples to token values to move left
to random; when b = 0 , embedding DDH tuples to key values to move right to random. inf encodes ﬁxed
programming information: it marks an epoch if c = h , otherwise it is the random encryption exponent. On
lines 3 and 6, ors refers to the set{O.Enc,O.Next,O.Upd,O.Corr}. On lines 28 and 34,⊿◁indicates ∆0 and
∆fwri+1 are skipped in the computation.
The reductionB4.1 receives DDH tuples (X,Y,Z ), ﬂips a coin b and simulates gameGb
i . Whenever the
37
reduction needs to provide an output of π(·) toA, it chooses (‘programs’) some random value r such that
π(·) = gr. Then, we use the fact that (gr)ke = (gke)r and use the gke values as ‘public keys’ to allow
simulation. In this setting, decryption (i.e. π−1) is simply a lookup to this mapping of the ideal cipher π. A
summary of the technical simulations follows:
Initially,
1. B4.1 guesses the values of h, fwli, fwri.
2. B4.1 generates all keys and tokens except for kfwli, ..., kfwri, ∆fwli, ∆fwri+1. If Ai ever corrupts these
keys and tokens – which indicates the ﬁrewall guess is wrong – the reduction aborts the game.
3. B4.1 computes the public values of keys in an epoch:
• e⁄∈{ fwli, ..., fwri}:B4.1 computes PKe =gke;
• e∈{ fwli, ..., fwri}:B4.1 embeds DDH valueY as PKfwli. More precisely, if b = 0, PKfwli =Y ,
otherwise PKfwli = Y kfwli−1 (since g∆fwli = Y ). Then B4.1 uses tokens ∆fwli+1, ..., ∆fwri to
compute the remaining public key values PKe in the insulated region.
To simulate a non-challenge ciphertext that is:
• not the h-th query toO.Enc:B4.1 generates a random valuer for each encryption (so that the randomness
will be consistent for calls thatAi makes toO.Upd) and programs the ideal cipher with Ce = PKr
e. To
respond toO.Upd queries, the reduction computes Ce′ = PKr
e′ to update a non-challenge ciphertext to
epoch e′.
• the h-th query toO.Enc:B4.1 embeds either a random ciphertext ( b = 0 ) or a DDH value ( b = 1 ) to
the encryption (Ceh). Furthermore, the reduction uses tokens ∆0, ..., ∆fwli−1 to update the h-th encryp-
tion. Note that ¯C is an update of the h-th encryption. The adversary can not ask for update of the h-th
encryption in an epoch e≥ fwli, as this would trigger the trivial win condition[fwli, fwri]⊆I∗∩C∗⁄=∅.
To simulate challenge-equal ciphertext in an epoch that is:
• to the left of the i-th insulated region: B4.1 simulates SHINE0.Upd(¯C) using the tokens that it created
itself.
• within thei-th insulated region:B4.1 simulates SHINE0.Upd(¯C) if b = 1, and simulatesSHINE0.Enc( ¯M)
if b = 0. More precisely,B4.1 embeds DDH valueX to ciphertext information of challenge input, em-
beds DDH valueZ to the challenge ciphertext. Which means if b = 1, the reduction will give the value
X to Ceh,Z
∏fwli−1
j=eh+1 ∆j
to ˜Cfwli (recallg∆fwli =Y ) since
˜Cfwli = SHINE0.Upd(¯C) = ¯C
∆fwli
fwli−1 = (C
∆fwli
eh )
∏fwli−1
j=eh+1 ∆j
.
If b = 0 , the reduction will give X to π(N|| ¯M), and Z to ˜Cfwli (recall PKfwli = Y ) since ˜Cfwli =
SHINE0.Enc( ¯M) = π(N|| ¯M)kfwli . Furthermore, the reduction uses tokens ∆fwli+1, ..., ∆fwri to update
˜Cfwli to simulate all challenge ciphertext in epochs within the insulated region.
• to the right of the i-th insulated region: B4.1 simulates SHINE0.Enc( ¯M) using the keys that it created
itself.
Eventually,B4.1 receives the output bitb′ fromAi. If b′ = b, thenB4.1 guesses that it has seen real DDH tuples
(returns 0 to its DDH challenger), otherwise,B4.1 guesses that it has seen random DDH tuples (returns 1).
IfB4.1 receives a real DDH tuple, thenB4.1 perfectly simulates the environment ofAi inGb
i . IfB4.1 receives
a random DDH tuple, thenB4.1 wins with probability 1/2. After some computation similar to that in the proof
of Theorem 2.3 we have AdvDDH
G,B4.1(λ) = 1
2|Pr[G1
i = 1]− Pr[G0
i = 1]|.
38
SHINE0 is IND-ENC-CPASecure. As a corollary of Theorem 2.4 and Theorem 4.1,SHINE0 is IND-ENC-CPA
– however in Appendix A we give a tighter proof – eliminating theQE term – by directly proving theIND-ENC-CPA
security of SHINE0. The proof follows a similar strategy to that of Theorem 4.1, with one hybrid for each in-
sulated region.
MirrorSHINE is detIND-UE-CPA.
Theorem 4.3 (MirrorSHINE is detIND-UE-CPA). Let G be a group of order q (aλ-bit prime) with generator
g, and let MirrorSHINE be the updatable encryption scheme described in Fig. 26. For any detIND-UE-CPA
adversaryA against MirrorSHINE that asks at most QE queries toO.Enc before it makes its challenge, there
exists an adversaryB4.3 against DDH such that
AdvdetIND-UE-CPA
MirrorSHINE,A (λ)≤ 2(n + 1)3· QE· AdvDDH
G,B4.3(λ).
Proof. The proof is similar to the security proof of Theorem 4.1, except that the reduction will embed two
random group elements to the image of π1,π 2 while it simulates the output of the O.Enc oracle, instead of
embedding one random group element to the image of π. We will not give a detailed construction of the
reduction in this proof, since we will give a more general construction in the proof of Theorem 4.4.
OCBSHINE is detIND-UE-CPA. For convenience, we denote a vector with l + 2 elements to be ⃗C =
(C0, ...,C l+1). We also use the shorthand ⃗A← ⃗Bc (component-wise exponentiation) and ⃗A←B⃗ c(common-
base exponentiation) to mean the following:
⃗A← ⃗Bc
1 : forj = 0, ...,l + 1 do
2 : Aj← (Bj)c
⃗A←B⃗ c
1 : forj = 0, ...,l + 1 do
2 : Aj←Bcj
Theorem 4.4 (OCBSHINE is detIND-UE-CPA). Let G be a group of orderq (aλ-bit prime,λ =m) with gen-
eratorg, and let OCBSHINE be the updatable encryption scheme described in Fig. 28. For anydetIND-UE-CPA
adversaryA against OCBSHINE that asks at most QE queries toO.Enc before it makes its challenge, there
exists an adversaryB4.4 against DDH such that
AdvdetIND-UE-CPA
OCBSHINE,A (λ)≤ 2(n + 1)3· QE· AdvDDH
G,B4.4(λ).
Proof. The proof is similar to the security proof of Theorem 4.1, except that here we are dealing with vector of
ciphertexts. To simulate the output ofO.Enc, the reduction will embed a vector of random group elements to
the image of the random permutation family. The reduction is detailed in Fig. 31.
5.5 SHINE is INT-CTXTs
We then explain how we bound the advantage of any adversary playing the INT-CTXTs game for SHINE by
the advantage of a reduction playing CDH.
Proof Method for ciphertext integrity. In the INT-CTXTs game, the challenger will keep a list of consistent
values for ciphertexts (i.e. the underlying permutation output). Suppose˜C is a forgery attempt sent to theO.Try
query in epoch ˜e. Let ˜c = (˜C)1/k˜e be the underlying permutation output.
If ˜c is a new value, since we have that π (or (π1,π 2) or (π0,{πN‖i‖b})) is a random permutation then the
INT-CTXTs challenger simulates the preimage of ˜c under the corresponding random permutation(s) to be a
random string(s). So the probability that this (these) random string(s) matches the integrity tag is negligible,
and this carries over to the probability that the adversary wins the INT-CTXTs game.
If ˜c is an already-existing value, and suppose this event happens with probabilityp. We construct a reduction
playing the CDH game such that it wins CDH game with probabilityp· 1
QE(n+1)2 . Similar to the proof method
of Theorem 4.1, we construct a reduction playing the CDH experiment by guessing the location of the ﬁrewalls
around the challenge epoch. The reduction embeds the CDH value and simulates the INT-CTXTs game, using
any successfully-forged ciphertext to compute the CDH output to its CDH challenger.
39
ReductionB4.4 playing ExpDDH
G,B4.4
1 : receive (g,X,Y,Z )
2 : do Setup
3 : ⃗¯M,⃗¯C←A ors(λ)
4 : phase← 1
5 : Create ˜C with (⃗¯M,⃗¯C), get ˜C˜e
6 : b ′←A ors,O.Upd˜C(˜C˜e)
7 : twf← 1 if
8 : C∗∩K∗⁄=∅ or
9 : I∗∩C∗⁄=∅
10 : if ABORT occurred or twf = 1
11 : b ′ $
← −{0, 1}
12 : return b′
13 : if (i, fwli, fwri)⁄∈FW
14 : b ′ $
← −{0, 1}
15 : return b′
16 : if b′ = b
17 : return 0
18 : else
19 : return 1
Setup(λ)
20 : b
$
← −{0, 1}
21 : k 0← SHINE0.KG(λ)
22 : ∆ 0←⊥
23 : e, c, phase, twf← 0
24 : L, ˜L,C,K,T ←∅
25 : fwli, fwri
$
← −{0, ...,n}
26 : h
$
← −{1, ..., QE}
27 : forj∈{0, ..., fwli-1} do
28 : k j
$
← −Z∗
q; ∆j← kj
kj−1
⊿ ◁
29 : PKj←gkj
30 : forj∈{ fwri+1, ...,n} do
31 : k j
$
← −Z∗
q; ∆j← kj
kj−1
⊿ ◁
32 : PKj←gkj
Setup(λ) cont.
33 : if b = 0
34 : PKfwli←Y
35 : ⃗C
$
← −Gl+2
36 : else
37 : PKfwli←Y kfwli−1
38 : ⃗ r
$
← −(Z∗
q)l+2
39 : ⃗C
$
← −X⃗ r
40 : forj∈{ fwli+1, ..., fwri} do
41 : ∆ j
$
← −Z∗
q
42 : PKj← PK∆j
j−1
O.Enc(⃗M)
43 : c← c + 1
44 : if c = h
45 : ⃗Ce←⃗C; inf← e
46 : else
47 : ⃗inf
$
← −(Z∗
q)l+2
48 : Π( ⃗M)
$
← −g
⃗inf / /see caption
49 : ⃗Ce← PK
⃗inf
e
50 : L←L∪{ (c,⃗Ce, e; inf or ⃗inf)}
51 : return⃗Ce
O.Next
52 : e← e + 1
O.Upd(⃗Ce−1)
53 : if (j,⃗Ce−1, e− 1; inf or ⃗inf)⁄∈L
54 : return ⊥
55 : if j = h
56 : ⃗Ce←⃗C∆e
e−1
57 : else
58 : ⃗Ce← PK
⃗inf
e
59 : L←L∪{ (j,⃗Ce, e; inf or ⃗inf)}
60 : return⃗Ce
O.Corr(inp, ˆe)
61 : do Check(inp, ˆe; e; fwli, fwri)
62 : if inp = key
63 : K←K∪{ ˆe}
64 : return kˆe
65 : if inp = token
66 : T ←T ∪{ˆe}
67 : return ∆ˆe
Create ˜C with (⃗¯M,⃗¯C)
68 : if (h,⃗¯C, ˜e− 1; inf) /∈L
69 : return ABORT
70 : if b = 0
71 : ⃗ s
$
← −(Z∗
q)l+2
72 : Π( ⃗¯M)
$
← −X⃗ s
73 : ⃗˜Cfwli←Z⃗ s
74 : else
75 : Π( ⃗¯M)
$
← −Gl+2
76 : ⃗˜Cfwli← (Z
∏fwli−1
j=inf+1 ∆j)
⃗ r
77 : forj∈{ 0, ..., fwli− 1} do
78 : ⃗˜Cj←⃗¯C(∏j
k=0 ∆k)/(∏˜e−1
k=0 ∆k) / /left
79 : forj∈{ fwli + 1, ..., fwri} do
80 : ⃗˜Cj←⃗˜C∆j
j−1 / /embed
81 : forj∈{ fwri + 1, ...,n} do
82 : ⃗˜Cj←{ Π(⃗¯M)}kj / /right
83 : ˜L←∪ n
j=0{(⃗˜Cj,j )}
84 : return⃗˜C˜e
O.Upd ˜C
85 : C←C∪{ e}
86 : ﬁnd(⃗˜Ce, e)∈ ˜L
87 : return⃗˜Ce
Figure 31: Reduction B4.4 for proof of Theorem 4.4, in hybrid i. On lines 3 and 6, ors refers to the set
{O.Enc,O.Next,O.Upd,O.Corr}. On lines 28 and 31,⊿◁indicates ∆0 and ∆fwri+1 are skipped in the compu-
tation. On line 48 ofO.Enc, vector Π(⃗M) = (π0(N),π N‖1‖0(M1), ...,π N‖l‖0(Ml),π N‖l‖1(Σ)).
SHINE0 is INT-CTXTs.
Theorem 5.1 (SHINE0 is INT-CTXTs). Let G be a group of orderq (aλ-bit prime, whereλ =v +m+l) with
generatorg, and let SHINE0 be the updatable encryption scheme described in Fig. 25. For any INT-CTXTs
40
adversaryA against SHINE0 that asks at most QE queries toO.Enc before it asks itsO.Try query, there exists
an adversaryB5.1 against CDH such that
AdvINT-CTXTs
SHINE0,A (λ)≤ 1/2l + QE(n + 1)2AdvCDH
B5.1.
Proof. Note that the probability of a random string ends by 0l is 1/2l.
In the INT-CTXTs game, whenever, the adversary sends a forgery, suppose C∗, to theO.Try oracle. If the
trivial win conditions does not trigger, thenC∗ is a new ciphertext to the challenger and there exists an insulated
region around the challenge epoch. We split the proof into two parts based on if C∗1/ke is a new value to the
challenger:
1. If C∗1/ke is a new value, the random permutation π−1 will pick a random string a as the output of
π−1(C∗1/ke). So the probability ofa is valid (a (v +m +l)-bit string with al-bit zero string in the end)
is upper bounded by 1/2l.
2. If C∗1/ke is an existed value, denote this event asE3, we claim that the probability ofE3 happens is very
low. Which means it is hard to provide a valid forgery with a known permutation value. In other words,
without the knowledge of the encryption key, it is difﬁcult to provide a correct exponentiation. Formally,
we prove the following inequality in Lemma 5.2.
Pr[E3] = Pr[C∗1/ke exists, C∗ is new]≤ QE(n + 1)2AdvCDH.
In order to analyze the security, we deﬁne some events:
• E1 ={C∗ is new},
• E2 ={C∗1/ke is new, C∗ is new},
• Recall E3 ={C∗1/ke exists, C∗ is new}.
Denote the experiment ExpINT-CTXTs
SHINE0,A to be Exp. Then we have the following results:
• Pr[Exp = 1|¬E1] = 0.
• We have proved Pr[Exp = 1|E2]≤ 1/2l in part 1.
• Events¬E1,E 2,E 3 are disjoint from each other, so Pr[¬E1] + Pr[E2] + Pr[E3] = 1.
• We have proved Pr[E3]≤ QE(n + 1)2AdvCDH in Lemma 5.2.
Applying the above properties, we can compute the INT-CTXTs advantage
AdvINT-CTXTs
SHINE0,A (λ) = Pr[Exp = 1]
= Pr[Exp = 1|¬E1]· Pr[¬E1] + Pr[Exp = 1|E2]· Pr[E2] + Pr[Exp = 1|E3]· Pr[E3]
= Pr[Exp = 1|E2]· Pr[E2] + Pr[Exp = 1|E3]· Pr[E3]
≤ Pr[Exp = 1|E2] + Pr[E3]
≤ 1/2l + QE(n + 1)2AdvCDH.
Lemma 5.2. LetA be an INT-CTXTs adversary against SHINE0 that asks at most QE queries toO.Enc before
it asks itsO.Try query. Suppose ˜C is a forgery attempt provided byA and the corresponding permutation value
is ˜c. Deﬁne E to be the event that ˜c is an existed value but ˜C is a new value. Then there exists an adversary
B5.2 against CDH such that
Pr[E]≤ QE(n + 1)2AdvCDH
B5.2
41
Proof. SupposeA is an adversary against INT-CTXTs game, and it can provide a forgery such that ˜C is a new
ciphertext but the underlying permutation value is an existed one with probability Pr[E]. We claim that there
exists a reductionB5.2, detailed in Figure 32, such that it wins CDH game with probability Pr[E]· 1
QE(n+1)2 .
ReductionB5.2 playing ExpCDH
G,B5.2
1 : receive (g,X,Y )
2 : do Setup
3 : AO.Enc,O.Next,O.Upd,O.Corr,O.Try(λ)
4 : if twf = 1 or ABORT occurred
5 : win← 0
6 : else
7 : return win
Setup(λ)
8 : k 0← SHINE0.KG(λ)
9 : ∆ 0←⊥; e, c← 0; win← 0
10 : L∗,C,K,T ←∅
11 : ˆfwl, ˆfwr
$
← −{0, ...,n}
12 : h
$
← −{1, ..., QE}
13 : forj∈{ 0, ..., ˆfwl-1} do
14 : k j
$
← −Z∗
q
15 : ∆ j← kj
kj−1
/ /except ∆0
16 : PKj←gkj
17 : for{ ˆfwr+1, ...,n} do
18 : k j
$
← −Z∗
q
19 : ∆ j← kj
kj−1
/ /except ∆ ˆfwr+1
20 : PKj←gkj
21 : PK ˆfwl←Y
22 : forj∈{ ˆfwl+1, ..., ˆfwr} do
23 : ∆ j
$
← −Z∗
q; PKj← PK∆j
j−1
O.Enc(M)
24 : c← c + 1
25 : if c = h
26 : if e< ˆfwl
27 : π(N‖M‖0l)←X
28 : C e←Xke
29 : else
30 : return ABORT
31 : else
32 : r
$
← −Z∗
q;
33 : π(N‖M‖0l)←gr
34 : C e← PKr
e
35 : L∗←L∗∪{ (c, Ce, e;r)}⋗
36 : return Ce
O.Next()
37 : e← e + 1
O.Upd(Ce−1)
38 : if (j, Ce−1, e− 1;r) /∈L∗
39 : return ⊥
40 : if j = h
41 : if e< ˆfwl
42 : C e← C∆e
e−1
43 : else
44 : return ABORT
45 : else
46 : C e← PKr
e
47 : L∗←L∗∪{ (j, Ce, e;r)}
48 : return Ce
O.Corr(inp, ˆe)
49 : do Check(inp, ˆe; e; ˆfwl, ˆfwr)
50 : if inp = key
51 : K←K∪{ ˆe}
52 : return kˆe
53 : if inp = token
54 : T ←T ∪{ˆe}
55 : fori∈T ∗ do
56 : for (j, Ci−1,i− 1;r)∈L∗ do
57 : C i←O.Upd(Ci−1)
58 : L∗←L∗∪{ (j, Ci,i ;r)}
59 : return ∆ˆe
O.Try(˜C)
60 : if phase = 1
61 : return ⊥
62 : phase← 1
63 : if ˜e∈K∗ or ˜C∈L∗
64 : twf← 1
65 : if ˜e⁄∈{ ˆfwl, ..., ˆfwr}
66 : twf← 1
67 : y← ˜C1/ ∏e=˜e
e= ˆfwl+1 ∆e
68 : call Chall withy; get b
69 : win← b
Figure 32: ReductionB5.2 for proof of Lemma 5.2. On line 35, ⋗ indicatesr is empty when c = h.
The reduction will guess the location of ﬁrewalls around the epoch whenO.Try query happens, furthermore,
it guess which message (suppose the h-th encryption) might be the underlying message of the forgery. After
it receives the CDH valuesga,g b, it embeds ga to the h-th encryption as π(N‖M‖0l)← ga, embeds gb to
the public key value on the left ﬁrewall as PK ˆfwl = gk ˆfwl ← gb. Then ˜C = gab ∏e=˜e
e= ˆfwl+1 ∆e with probability
Pr[E]· 1
QE(n+1)2 , which is the advantage of winning the CDH game.
MirrorSHINE is INT-CTXTs.
Theorem 5.3 (MirrorSHINE is INT-CTXTs). Let G be a group of order q (aλ-bit prime) with generator g,
and let MirrorSHINE be the updatable encryption scheme described in Fig. 26. For any INT-CTXTs adversary
42
A against MirrorSHINE that asks at most queries at most QE queries toO.Enc before it asks itsO.Try query,
there exists an adversaryB5.3 against CDH such that
AdvINT-CTXTs
MirrorSHINE,A(λ)≤ 1/2|N| + 2QE(n + 1)2AdvCDH
B5.3
Proof. Similar to the proof in Theorem 5.1. Suppose ˜C = (˜C1, ˜C2) is a new ciphertext sent as theO.Try query.
Then at least one block of the ciphertext, suppose ˜Ci, is new. We split the proof in two parts:
• If (˜Ci)1/ke is new. The random permutationπ−1
i will pick a random stringai as the output ofπ−1
i ((˜Ci)1/ke).
So the probability ofai is valid (satisfya1 =a2) is upper bounded by 1/2|N| .
• If (˜Ci)1/ke is an existed value outputted by permutationπi. Similar to the proof in Theorem 5.1, we can
prove that Pr[(˜Ci)1/ke exists, ˜Ci is new ]≤ 2QE(n + 1)2AdvCDH
B5.3.
OCBSHINE is INT-CTXTs.
Theorem 5.4 (OCBSHINE is INT-CTXTs). Let G be a group of orderq (aλ-bit prime,λ =m) with generator
g, and let OCBSHINE be the updatable encryption scheme described in Fig. 28. For anyINT-CTXTs adversary
A against OCBSHINE that asks at most QE queries, on messages with at most L message blocks, toO.Enc
before it asks itsO.Try query, there exists an adversaryB5.4 against CDH such that
AdvINT-CTXTs
OCBSHINE,A(λ)≤ QE2 + QE
2m−a + (L + 1)QE(n + 1)2AdvCDH
B5.4.
Proof. Game 0
The ﬁrst game is the experiment ExpINT-CTXTs
OCBSHINE,A, given in Fig. 6 and Fig. 10. As deﬁnition 4 we have
AdvINT-CTXTs
OCBSHINE,A(λ) = Pr[G0 = 1]
Game 1
Modify the response of the encryption oracle such that the game randomly picks a nonce and if the nonce
repeats, it aborts the game and returns win = 0. This loss is upper-bounded by QE2
2m−a , then we have
|Pr[G0 = 1]− Pr[G1 = 1]|≤ QE2
2m−a
Finally, we claimPr[G1 = 1]≤ QE
2m−a + (l + 1)QE(n + 1)2AdvCDH. Similar to the proof in Theorem 5.1.
Suppose ˜C = ( ˜C0, ..., ˜C˜l+1) is a forgery attempt sent as theO.Try query in epoch ˜e. Suppose ˜ci = ( ˜Ci)1/k˜e,
the corresponding message is ˜Mi. Let ˜N be the underlying nonce and ˜Σ be the underlying checksum. We
consider the following two situations.
1. If (˜c0, ..., ˜c˜l+1) is new, we claim that the probability of the adversary correctly guessing ˜Σ is upper-
bounded by QE
2m−a .
(a) If ˜c0 is new, then either ˜N is new or| ˜M˜l| is new.
i. If ˜N is equal to some already existing nonce N, we claim that the probability that this event
happens is very low. Sinceπ0 is a random permutation, the ﬁrst (m-a) bits of the preimage of
˜c0 underπ0, which is ˜N, is as likely as any (m-a)-bit string. So the probability that ˜N collides
with one of the existed nonces is upper bounded by QE/2m−a.
ii. If ˜N is new, therefore π˜N‖˜l‖1 is a new random permutation. The adversary sees no image
and preimage of π˜N‖˜l‖1. The preimage of ˜c˜l+1 underπ˜N‖˜l‖1, which is ˜Σ, is as likely as any
other m-bit string. So the probability that the adversary correctly guesses ˜Σ (which means
˜Σ =⊕l
i=1 ˜Mi) is 2−m.
43
(b) If ˜c0 =c0 for some already existing (c0, ...,c l+1) but ˜l⁄=l, similar to the above situationπ˜N‖˜l‖1 is
a new random permutation. So the probability that the adversary correctly guesses ˜Σ is 2−m.
(c) If ˜c0 = c0 for some already existing (c0, ...,c l+1) and ˜l = l but ˜cj⁄= cj for some j∈{ 1, ..., ˜l}.
The adversary sees one image ofπ˜N‖j‖0, that is,cj. The preimage of ˜cj underπ˜N‖j‖0, which is ˜Mj,
is as likely as any m-bit string except for Mj (or Ml‖0∗ whenj = l). So the probability that the
adversary correctly guesses ˜Σ is 1
2m−1.
(d) If ˜c0 = c0 for some already existing (c0, ...,c l+1) and ˜l = l and ˜cj = cj for all j∈{ 1, ..., ˜l}
but ˜c˜l+1 ⁄= cl+1. This event is impossible to happen, as ˜N = N ,|M˜l| = |Ml| and ˜l = l so
π˜N‖˜l‖1 =πN‖l‖1, furthermore ˜Mj = Mj for allj∈{ 1, ..., ˜l}, so ˜Σ = Σ and then ˜c˜l+1 =cl+1.
2. If (˜c0, ..., ˜c˜l+1) is an already existing value output by the permutations but ˜C = ( ˜C0, ..., ˜C˜l+1) is a
new ciphertext, then this is equivalent to (˜c0, ..., ˜c˜l) exists but (˜C0, ..., ˜C˜l) is new, as in the analysis of
1.(d). Similar to the proof in Theorem 5.1, we can prove that the probability of this event happening is
upper-bounded by CDH advantage:
Pr[ (˜c0, ..., ˜c˜l) exists but (˜C0, ..., ˜C
˜l) is new ]≤ (L + 1)QE(n + 1)2AdvCDH.
5.6 Implementing the SHINE Schemes
In the proofs of Theorem 4 and Theorem 5, we require that π is a random (unkeyed) permutation which must
be followed by a mapping to an appropriate group for exponentiation by the epoch key. For the permutation we
do not need any speciﬁc and strong properties that are provided by modern constructions of block ciphers and
sponges. As far as the proof goes, and in practice, the property that we want from this permutation is that given
a ciphertext and the inverse of the epoch key ke, the only way to extract useful information about the message
is to apply the inverse permutationπ−1. The random permutation model (or ideal cipher model) is thus the tool
we need here to create a simple interface for this aspect of our proof.
The different members of the SHINE family are suited to different application scenarios. The variants
SHINE0 and MirrorSHINE are best suited to cases where messages are of small, ﬁxed size, such as customer
credentials (or phone contact details, to return to the motivating example in the Introduction). For applications
with longer messages (i.e. larger than the size of the exponentiation group), OCBSHINE is considerably faster
and we will assume that these choices are made in our implementation suggestions. This removes any need
for larger groups in order to encrypt longer messages. Using larger groups would not only carry a signiﬁcant
performance penalty, but also force us to construct custom large blocklength block ciphers. Although this can
be done (and has been for RSA groups [GOR18], where our approach would not work), the analysis is tricky.
Instantiating the ideal permutation. The message block in SHINE0, MirrorSHINE and the ﬁnal message
block in OCBSHINE must be appropriately padded to allow application of the permutation. The permutation
could be deployed using a variable-output-length sponge construction, a block cipher or an authenticated en-
cryption scheme with a ﬁxed key and suitably large nonce space. In practice, we suggest to instantiate the
random permutation with a block cipher of a suitable block length. AES has only 128-bit blocks which does
not match the minimum required size of the group, so we instead suggest block ciphers such as Threeﬁsh, or
original Rijndael, allowing block lengths of 256 or 512 bits.
Mapping to elliptic curve group. We would like to instantiate our groups using elliptic curves. Using mod-
ern techniques it is always possible to ﬁnd a suitable curve over a ﬁeld with a size matching the block length
of the ideal permutation, but using standard curves like NIST P-256 or P-521 seems desirable. A standard
approach [Kob87] is to embed bit strings in the X-coordinate of a point as follows. Note that close to half the
ﬁeld elements are X-coordinates of points. Given a ﬁeld of size q, we consider a t-bit block as an integer x0
and ﬁnd a small integeru such thatu2t +x0 is theX-coordinate of a curve point. If logq−t is between 8 and
9, this will fail to terminate with probability around 2−256 under reasonable assumptions.
With this approach we could use Threeﬁsh with 512-bit blocks together with NIST P-521 curve. If we
want to use 256-bit blocks from Threeﬁsh, or original Rijndael, together with NIST P-256 curve, we can use
44
a standard block cipher iteration trick [RSA78] to reduce the block length from 256 bits, so that embedding in
theX-coordinate still works, as follows. With block lengtht+τ, concatenate at-bit block withτ leading zeros
and apply the block cipher until the τ leading bits of the result are all zeros. Discard these zeros to get a t-bit
block. This is fairly cheap as for our purposes 8 or 9 bits will do.
Note that we have constructed an injective embedding of a block into an elliptic curve, not a bijection as
assumed in our proofs. When we sample group elements in our proof, we must take care to sample points in
the image of our embedding, but this can be done cheaply.
6 Conclusions
In this work we provided a suite of new updatable encryption schemes, collectively called SHINE, and a new
deﬁnition of security xxIND-UE-atk (that implies prior notions) in which we prove our schemes secure. In the
process, we provided a greater understanding of the proof techniques that are inherent in the strong corruption
model that is desirable for updatable encryption – in particular in the context of deterministic updates that is
desirable in practice.
Acknowledgements. This research was funded by the Research Council of Norway under Project No. 248166.
Gareth T. Davies is supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Hori-
zon 2020 research and innovation programme, grant agreement 802823. We would like to thank Frederik
Armknecht, Håvard Raddum and Mohsen Toorani for fruitful discussions in the initial stages of this project,
and anonymous reviewers for a number of useful suggestions for improvement. We would also like to thank
Adam O’Neill for a number of useful suggestions for improvement. Parts of this work were conducted while
Gareth T. Davies was employed by NTNU Trondheim and the University of Paderborn.
References
[AFGH05] Giuseppe Ateniese, Kevin Fu, Matthew Green, and Susan Hohenberger. Improved proxy re-
encryption schemes with applications to secure distributed storage. In Proceedings of the Net-
work and Distributed System Security Symposium, NDSS 2005, San Diego, California, USA . The
Internet Society, 2005. Cited on page 6.
[BBS98] Matt Blaze, Gerrit Bleumer, and Martin Strauss. Divertible protocols and atomic proxy cryptogra-
phy. In Kaisa Nyberg, editor, Proceedings of EUROCRYPT 1998, volume 1403 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, pages 127–144. Springer, 1998. Cited on page 6.
[BLMR13] Dan Boneh, Kevin Lewi, Hart William Montgomery, and Ananth Raghunathan. Key homomorphic
prfs and their applications. In Ran Canetti and Juan A. Garay, editors, Advances in Cryptology -
CRYPTO 2013 - 33rd Annual Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 18-22,
2013. Proceedings, Part I, volume 8042 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 410–428.
Springer, 2013. Cited on pages 3, 5, 7, 8, 50, and 51.
[BLMR15] Dan Boneh, Kevin Lewi, Hart William Montgomery, and Ananth Raghunathan. Key homomorphic
prfs and their applications. IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2015/220 , 2015. Cited on
pages 3 and 5.
[BN08] Mihir Bellare and Chanathip Namprempre. Authenticated encryption: Relations among notions
and analysis of the generic composition paradigm. J. Cryptology, 21(4):469–491, 2008. Cited on
page 4.
[CCFL17] Christian Cachin, Jan Camenisch, Eduarda Freire-Stögbuchner, and Anja Lehmann. Updatable
tokenization: Formal deﬁnitions and provably secure constructions. In Aggelos Kiayias, editor,
Financial Cryptography and Data Security - 21st International Conference, FC 2017, Sliema,
Malta, April 3-7, 2017, Revised Selected Papers , volume 10322 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 59–75. Springer, 2017. Cited on page 6.
45
[CH07] Ran Canetti and Susan Hohenberger. Chosen-ciphertext secure proxy re-encryption. In Peng
Ning, Sabrina De Capitani di Vimercati, and Paul F. Syverson, editors, Proceedings of the 2007
ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security, CCS 2007, Alexandria, Virginia,
USA, October 28-31, 2007, pages 185–194. ACM, 2007. Cited on page 6.
[Cou18] PCI Security Standards Council. Data security standard (PCI DSS v3.2.1), 2018.
https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/. Cited on pages 3 and 6.
[CPS08] Jean-Sébastien Coron, Jacques Patarin, and Yannick Seurin. The random oracle model and the
ideal cipher model are equivalent. In David A. Wagner, editor,Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO
2008, 28th Annual International Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 17-21,
2008. Proceedings, volume 5157 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 1–20. Springer,
2008. Cited on page 34.
[DDLM19] Alex Davidson, Amit Deo, Ela Lee, and Keith Martin. Strong post-compromise secure proxy re-
encryption. In Julian Jang-Jaccard and Fuchun Guo, editors, Information Security and Privacy -
24th Australasian Conference, ACISP 2019, Christchurch, New Zealand, July 3-5, 2019, Proceed-
ings, volume 11547 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 58–77. Springer, 2019. Cited
on page 6.
[DRC14] Sandra Diaz-Santiago, Lil María Rodríguez-Henríquez, and Debrup Chakraborty. A cryptographic
study of tokenization systems. In Mohammad S. Obaidat, Andreas Holzinger, and Pierangela
Samarati, editors, SECRYPT 2014 - Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Security
and Cryptography, Vienna, Austria, 28-30 August, 2014, pages 393–398. SciTePress, 2014. Cited
on page 6.
[EPRS17a] Adam Everspaugh, Kenneth G. Paterson, Thomas Ristenpart, and Samuel Scott. Key rotation for
authenticated encryption. In Jonathan Katz and Hovav Shacham, editors, Advances in Cryptology
- CRYPTO 2017 - 37th Annual International Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA,
August 20-24, 2017, Proceedings, Part III, volume 10403 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 98–129. Springer, 2017. Cited on pages 3 and 5.
[EPRS17b] Adam Everspaugh, Kenneth G. Paterson, Thomas Ristenpart, and Samuel Scott. Key rotation for
authenticated encryption. IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2017/527, 2017. Cited on page
5.
[GOR18] Craig Gentry, Adam O’Neill, and Leonid Reyzin. A uniﬁed framework for trapdoor-permutation-
based sequential aggregate signatures. In Michel Abdalla and Ricardo Dahab, editors, Public-Key
Cryptography – PKC 2018, pages 34–57, Cham, 2018. Springer International Publishing. Cited
on page 44.
[JKR19] Stanislaw Jarecki, Hugo Krawczyk, and Jason K. Resch. Updatable oblivious key management
for storage systems. In Lorenzo Cavallaro, Johannes Kinder, XiaoFeng Wang, and Jonathan Katz,
editors, Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, CCS 2019, London, UK, November 11-15, 2019, pages 379–393. ACM, 2019. Cited on
page 5.
[KLR19a] Michael Klooß, Anja Lehmann, and Andy Rupp. (R)CCA secure updatable encryption with in-
tegrity protection. In Yuval Ishai and Vincent Rijmen, editors, Advances in Cryptology - EURO-
CRYPT 2019 - 38th Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Crypto-
graphic Techniques, Darmstadt, Germany, May 19-23, 2019, Proceedings, Part I , volume 11476
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 68–99. Springer, 2019. Cited on pages 3, 5, 7, 9, 16,
19, and 20.
[KLR19b] Michael Klooß, Anja Lehmann, and Andy Rupp. (R)CCA secure updatable encryption with in-
tegrity protection. IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2019/222, 2019. Cited on page 35.
46
[Kob87] Neil Koblitz. Elliptic curve cryptosystems. Mathematics of Computation, 48(177):203–209, 1987.
Cited on page 44.
[KRS+03] Mahesh Kallahalla, Erik Riedel, Ram Swaminathan, Qian Wang, and Kevin Fu. Plutus: Scalable
secure ﬁle sharing on untrusted storage. In Jeff Chase, editor, Proceedings of the FAST ’03 Con-
ference on File and Storage Technologies, March 31 - April 2, 2003, Cathedral Hill Hotel, San
Francisco, California, USA. USENIX, 2003. Cited on page 3.
[Lee17] Ela Lee. Improved security notions for proxy re-encryption to enforce access control. In Tanja
Lange and Orr Dunkelman, editors, Progress in Cryptology - LATINCRYPT 2017 - 5th Inter-
national Conference on Cryptology and Information Security in Latin America, Havana, Cuba,
September 20-22, 2017, Revised Selected Papers , volume 11368 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 66–85. Springer, 2017. Cited on page 6.
[Leh19] Anja Lehmann. Updatable encryption & key rotation (presentation slides), 2019.
https://summerschool-croatia.cs.ru.nl/2019/slides/lehmann1.pdf. Cited on page 5.
[LT18a] Anja Lehmann and Björn Tackmann. Updatable encryption with post-compromise security. In
Jesper Buus Nielsen and Vincent Rijmen, editors, Advances in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT 2018
- 37th Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Tech-
niques, Tel Aviv, Israel, April 29 - May 3, 2018 Proceedings, Part III , volume 10822 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science , pages 685–716. Springer, 2018. Cited on pages 3, 4, 6, 7, 16, 51,
and 56.
[LT18b] Anja Lehmann and Björn Tackmann. Updatable encryption with post-compromise security. IACR
Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2018/118, 2018. Cited on pages 5 and 56.
[MS18] Steven Myers and Adam Shull. Practical revocation and key rotation. In Nigel P. Smart, editor,
Topics in Cryptology - CT-RSA 2018 - The Cryptographers’ Track at the RSA Conference 2018, San
Francisco, CA, USA, April 16-20, 2018, Proceedings, volume 10808 ofLecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 157–178. Springer, 2018. Cited on page 6.
[NPR99] Moni Naor, Benny Pinkas, and Omer Reingold. Distributed pseudo-random functions and kdcs.
In Jacques Stern, editor, Advances in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT ’99, International Conference
on the Theory and Application of Cryptographic Techniques, Prague, Czech Republic, May 2-6,
1999, Proceeding, volume 1592 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 327–346. Springer,
1999. Cited on page 50.
[RBBK01] Phillip Rogaway, Mihir Bellare, John Black, and Ted Krovetz. OCB: a block-cipher mode of
operation for efﬁcient authenticated encryption. In Michael K. Reiter and Pierangela Samarati,
editors, CCS 2001, Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA, November 6-8, 2001 , pages 196–205. ACM, 2001.
Cited on page 32.
[RSA78] R. L. Rivest, A. Shamir, and L. M. Adleman. A method for obtaining digital signatures and public-
key cryptosystems. Communications of the ACM, 21:120–126, 1978. Cited on page 45.
[Sha49] Claude E Shannon. Communication theory of secrecy systems. Bell system technical journal ,
28(4):656–715, 1949. Cited on page 34.
[SNS17] Kouichi Sakurai, Takashi Nishide, and Amril Syalim. Improved proxy re-encryption scheme for
symmetric key cryptography. In International Workshop on Big Data and Information Security,
IWBIS 2017, Jakarta, Indonesia, September 23-24, 2017 , pages 105–111. IEEE, 2017. Cited on
page 6.
47
A SHINE0 is IND-ENC -CPA Secure
Theorem 4.2. Let G be a group of order q (aλ-bit prime) with generator g, and let SHINE0 be the updatable
encryption scheme described in Fig. 25. For any IND-ENC -CPA adversaryA against SHINE0, there exists an
adversaryB4.2 against DDH such that
AdvIND-ENC-CPA
SHINE0,A (λ)≤ 2(n + 1)3· AdvDDH
G,B4.2(λ).
Proof. Similarly to the proof of Theorem 4.1, we use the ﬁrewall technique and construct hybrid games. For
b∈{ 0, 1}, deﬁne gameGb
i as ExpIND-ENC-CPA-b
SHINE0,A except for:
• The game randomly picks two numbers fwli, fwri and if fwli, fwri are not thei-th ﬁrewalls, a random bit
is returned for b′. This loss is upper bounded by (n + 1)2;
• For challenge made in epoch ˜e with input ( ¯M0, ¯M1): If ˜e < fwli then return a ciphertext of ¯M1, if
˜e> fwri return a ciphertext of ¯M0, and if fwli≤ ˜e≤ fwri return a ciphertext of ¯Mb;
• AfterA outputs b′: returns b′ if twf⁄= 1 or some additional trivial win condition is triggered.
Similarly to the computation in Theorem 4.1, we have
AdvIND-ENC-CPA
SHINE0,A (λ) = (n + 1)2·
( l∑
i=1
|Pr[G1
i = 1]− Pr[G0
i = 1]|
)
,
for somel. Again we need to prove that|Pr[G1
i = 1]− Pr[G0
i = 1]|≤ 2AdvDDH
G, (λ).
We construct a reductionB4.2, detailed in Fig. 33, that is playing the standard DDH game and runsAi. The
reductionB4.2 ﬂips a coin b, and simulatesGb
i by using DDH tuples (X,Y,Z ) to output SHINE0.Enc( ¯Mb) in
thei-th insulated region. IfAi guess b correctly, thenB4.2 guesses its real DDH tuples, otherwise,B4.2 guess
its random DDH tuples. IfB4.2 receives a real DDH tuple, thenB4.2 perfectly simulates the input ofAi inGb
i .
IfB4.2 receives a random DDH tuple, thenB4.2 wins with probability 1/2. After some computation similar to
that in the proof of Theorem 2.3 we have that AdvDDH
G,B4.2(λ) = 1
2|Pr[G1
i = 1]− Pr[G0
i = 1]|.
48
ReductionB4.2 playing ExpDDH
G,B4.2 in hybridi
1 : receive (g,X,Y,Z )
2 : do Setup
3 : ¯M0, ¯M1←AO.Enc,O.Next,O.Upd,O.Corr(λ)
4 : phase← 1
5 : Create ˜C with ( ¯M0, ¯M1), get ˜C˜e
6 : b ′←AO.Enc,O.Next,O.Upd,O.Corr,O.Upd˜C(˜C˜e)
7 : twf← 1 if
8 : C∗∩K∗⁄=∅
9 : if ABORT occurred or twf = 1
10 : b ′ $
← −{0, 1}
11 : return b′
12 : if (i, fwli, fwri)⁄∈FW
13 : b ′ $
← −{0, 1}
14 : return b′
15 : if b′ = b
16 : return 0
17 : else
18 : return 1
Setup(λ)
19 : b
$
← −{0, 1}; k0← SHINE0.KG(λ)
20 : ∆ 0←⊥; e← 0; phase, twf← 0
21 : L, ˜L,C,K,T ←∅
22 : fwli, fwri
$
← −{0, ...,n}
23 : PKfwli←Y
24 : forj∈{ fwli+1, ..., fwri} do
25 : ∆ j
$
← −Z∗
q; PKj← PK∆j
j−1
26 : forj∈{0, ..., fwli-1}∪{ fwri+1, ...,n} do
27 : k j
$
← −Z∗
q; ∆j← kj
kj−1
⊿ ◁
; PKj←gkj
O.Enc(M)
28 : r
$
← −Z∗
q;π(N||M)←gr; Ce← PKr
e
29 : L←L∪{ (·, Ce, e;r)}
30 : return Ce
O.Next
31 : e← e + 1
O.Upd(Ce−1)
32 : if (·, Ce−1, e− 1;r)⁄∈L
33 : return ⊥
34 : C e← PKr
e
35 : L←L∪{ (·, Ce, e;r)}
36 : return Ce
O.Corr(inp, ˆe)
37 : do Check(inp, ˆe; e; fwli, fwri)
38 : if inp = key
39 : K←K∪{ ˆe}
40 : return kˆe
41 : if inp = token
42 : T ←T ∪{ˆe}
43 : return ∆ˆe
Create ˜C with ( ¯M0, ¯M1)
44 : π(N|| ¯Mb)←X
45 : π(N|| ¯Mb⊕1)
$
← −G
46 : ˜Cfwli←Z
47 : forj∈{ 0, ..., fwli− 1} do
48 : ˜Cj← (π(N|| ¯M1))kj / /left
49 : forj∈{ fwli + 1, ..., fwri} do
50 : ˜Cj← ˜C∆j
j−1 / /embed
51 : forj∈{ fwri + 1, ...,n} do
52 : ˜Cj← (π(N|| ¯M0))kj / /right
53 : ˜L←∪ n
j=0{(˜Cj,j )}
54 : return ˜C˜e
O.Upd ˜C
55 : C←C∪{ e}
56 : ﬁnd(˜Ce, e)∈ ˜L
57 : return ˜Ce
Figure 33: Reduction B4.2 for proof of Theorem 4.2. Embedding DDH tuples to challenge ciphertexts requires
faithful responses to queries within the i-th insulated region. On line 27, ⊿◁ indicates ∆0 and ∆fwri+1 are
skipped in the computation.
49
B The BLMR Scheme of Boneh, Lewi, Montgomery, and Raghunathan
We present the original scheme given by Boneh et al. [BLMR13], which we denote byBLMR. The scheme is a
direct application of the key-homomorphic PRFs deﬁned in the same paper: the authors observed that the Naor-
Reingold-Pinkas PRF [NPR99] is key homomorphic, and presented a number of other constructions based on
DLIN and LWE. The updatable encryption scheme BLMR [BLMR13], which is ciphertext-independent and
deﬁned in Fig. 34, represented the ﬁrst UE construction.
BLMR.KG(λ)
1 : k e
$
← −F.KG(λ)
2 : return ke
BLMR.TG(ke, ke+1)
3 : ∆ e+1← ke⊕ ke+1
4 : return ∆e+1
BLMR.Enc(ke, M)
5 : N
$
← −χ
6 : C 1
e← F(ke, N)⊗ M
7 : C e← (C1
e, N)
8 : return Ce
BLMR.Dec(ke, Ce)
9 : parse Ce = (C1
e, N)
10 : M ′← C1
e⊗ F(ke, N)
11 : return M′
BLMR.Upd(∆e+1, Ce)
12 : parse Ce = (C1
e, N)
13 : C e+1← (C1
e⊗ F(∆e+1, N), N)
14 : return Ce+1
Figure 34: Updatable encryption scheme BLMR [BLMR13] for key-homomorphic PRF F.
To present the schemes and the results in this section, we ﬁrst need to introduce a deﬁnition of a key-
homomorphic PRF, and also the regular (left-or-right) IND-CPA security deﬁnition for symmetric encryption.
Deﬁnition 13 (Key-homomorphic PRF [BLMR13]). LetF :KS×X →Y be some efﬁciently-computable
function, where (KS,⊕) and (Y,⊗) are groups. Then, (F,⊕,⊗) is a key-homomorphic PRF if F is a PRF,
and for every k1, k2∈KS and everyx∈X ,F (k1,x )⊗F (k2,x ) =F (k1⊕ k2).
Deﬁnition 14. Let SKE ={KG, E, D} be an symmetric encryption scheme. Then the IND-CPA advantage of
an adversaryA against SKE is deﬁned as
AdvIND-CPA
SKE,A (λ) =
⏐⏐⏐⏐Pr[ExpIND-CPA-1
SKE,A = 1]− Pr[ExpIND-CPA-0
SKE,A = 1]
⏐⏐⏐⏐,
where the experiment ExpIND-CPA-b
SKE,A is given in Fig. 35.
ExpIND-CPA-b
SKE,A (λ)
1 : k
$
← −KG
2 : (M 0, M1, st)←AO.E(λ)
3 : if|M0|⁄ =|M1|
4 : return ⊥
5 : ˜C
$
← −SKE.Enc(k, Mb)
6 : b ′←AO.E(˜C)
7 : return b′
O.E(M)
8 : C ← SKE.Enc(k, M)
9 : return C
Figure 35: The experiments deﬁning IND-CPA security for symmetric encryption schemes.
Note that BLMR is trivially insecure in terms of xxIND-UPD-atk (in any of its three ﬂavors) since the
adversary can gain the epoch key for the epoch preceding the challenge epoch, allowing decryption of the chal-
lenge input ciphertexts and consequently a direct comparison of nonce values between these input ciphertexts
and the challenge ciphertext.
50
BLMR+.KG(λ)
1 : k 1 $
← −F.KG(λ)
2 : k 2 $
← −SKE.KG(λ)
3 : k e← (k1, k2)
4 : return ke
BLMR+.TG(ke, ke+1)
5 : parse ke = (k1
e, k2
e)
6 : parse ke+1 = (k1
e+1, k2
e+1)
7 : ∆ e+1← (k1
e⊕ k1
e+1, (k2
e, k2
e+1))
8 : return ∆e+1
BLMR+.Enc(ke, M)
9 : parse ke = (k1
e, k2
e)
10 : N
$
← −χ
11 : C 1
e← F(k1
e, N)⊗ M
12 : C 2
e← SKE.E(k2
e, N)
13 : C e← (C1
e, C2
e)
14 : return Ce
BLMR+.Dec(ke, Ce
15 : parse ke = (k1
e, k2
e)
16 : parse Ce = (C1
e, C2
e)
17 : N ← SKE.D(k2
e, C2
e)
18 : M ′← C1
e⊗ F(k1
e, N)
19 : return M′
BLMR+.Upd(∆e+1, Ce)
20 : parse ∆e+1 = (∆′
e+1, (k2
e, k2
e+1))
21 : parse Ce = (C1
e, C2
e)
22 : N ← SKE.D(k2
e, C2
e)
23 : C 1
e+1← C1
e⊗ F(∆′
e+1, N)
24 : C 2
e+1← SKE.E(k2
e+1, N)
25 : C e+1← (C1
e+1, C2
e+1)
26 : return Ce+1
Figure 36: Updatable encryption scheme BLMR+ [BLMR13, LT18a] for key-homomorphic PRF F and sym-
metric key encryption scheme SKE.
LT18 detailed an extension of BLMR, denoted BLMR+, where the nonce is encrypted: this scheme is
described in Fig. 36. LT18 showed thatBLMR+ is IND-ENC-CPA and weakIND-UPD-CPA secure, however it
is not detIND-UE-CPA secure, since the token contains the encryption key for the nonce value. More precisely,
the adversary runs as follows:
• Choose some M0, callO.Enc(M0) and receive some C.
• CallO.Next, choose M1 (that is distinct from M0), doO.Chall(C, M1) and receive ˜C.
• CallO.Next, callO.Upd ˜C, callO.Corr(token, 2) andO.Corr(key, 0).
• Do BLMR+.Deck0(C) to see its nonce, do Dk2
2
(˜C) to see nonce of challenge ciphertext and compare.
This is a very similar attack to the one LT18 used to demonstrate thatBLMR+ is not detIND-UPD-CPA secure.
Although BLMR+ is not detIND-UE-CPA secure, we can prove that it is weakIND-UE-CPA secure.
B.1 BLMR+ is weakIND-UE-CPA Secure.
Trivial wins for a weak model. An additional notion weakIND-UPD-CPA was used by LT18 for proving
their BLMR+ scheme secure: if the adversary has access to any token or key which could leak the nonce of a
challenge input ciphertext, the trivial win ﬂag is triggered if the adversary gains access to any token which could
reveal the nonce of a known (version of the) challenge ciphertext (i.e. ifI∗∩ (K∗∪T ∗)⁄=∅, then twf← 1 if
∃e∈C ∗ such that e or e + 1∈T ∗). This is necessary because the token in BLMR+ contains the symmetric
keys that enable decryption and re-encryption of the nonce.
Proof technique of Proposition 6. The proof technique is very similar to the proof of weakIND-UPD-CPA
security of BLMR+ in LT18 [LT18a]. We consider two situations of the additional requirements ofweakIND-UE-CPA
security and provide two proofs based on these situations. We only describe the ﬁrst proof technique as both
proofs use the same strategy. We construct hybrid games across each epoch, such that distinguishing the end-
points represents success in the weakIND-UE-CPA game. Suppose Ai is an adversary trying to distinguish
games in hybridi. We consider a modiﬁed hybrid game in which the ﬁrst element of ciphertexts is a uniformly
random element. We can prove that the ability to notice this change is upper bounded byPRF advantage. Then,
we conclude the proof by switching out the nonce inside the encryption in the second component: noticing this
change is upper bounded by IND-CPA advantage of an adversary against SKE.
51
Proposition 6. Let BLMR+ be the updatable encryption scheme described in Fig. 36. For anyweakIND-UE-CPA
adversaryA against UE that asks at most QE queries toO.Enc before it makes its challenge, there exists an
IND-CPA adversaryBIND-CPA
6b against SKE and an PRF adversaryBPRF
6a against F such that
AdvweakIND-UE-CPA
BLMR+,A (λ)≤ (n + 1)3·
(
AdvIND-CPA
SKE,BIND-CPA
6b
(λ) + 2AdvPRF
F,BPRF
6a
(λ) + 2QE2
|X|
)
.
Proof. The additional requirement of weakIND-UE-CPA security states: If the adversary knows a secret key or
a token in epoch e∗∈I∗, then for any e∈C∗, if the adversary corrupts ∆e or ∆e+1 then the adversary trivially
loses, i.e. twf← 1. We consider two situations (whether or notI∗∩ (K∗∪T ∗) =∅) that might happen. The
reduction can ﬂip a coin at the beginning of the simulation to guess which situation the adversary will produce
and set up the simulation appropriately.
Situation 1. Suppose the adversary knows a secret key or a token in epoch e∗∈I∗.
(Step 1.) We construct a sequence of hybrid games. Deﬁne gameGi as ExpweakIND-UE-CPA-b
BLMR+,A except for:
• The challenge input ( ¯M, ¯C), called in epochj. If j≤i then return a ciphertext that is an update of ¯C, if
j >i then return a ciphertext that is an encryption of ¯M.
• AfterA outputs b′, returns b′ if twf⁄= 1.
Similarly the advantage AdvweakIND-UE-CPA
BLMR+,A (λ) is upper bounded by|Pr[G−1 = 1]− Pr[Gn = 1]|. For
anyi, we prove that
|Pr[Gi = 1]− Pr[Gi−1 = 1]|≤ AdvIND-CPA
SKE,BIND-CPA
6b
(λ) + 2AdvPRF
F,BPRF
6a
(λ) + 2QE2
|X| .
SupposeAi is an adversary trying to distinguish Gi fromGi−1. For all queries concerning epochs other
thani the responses will be equal in either game, so we assume Ai asks for a challenge ciphertext in epoch i.
That means if the adversary corrupts tokens in epoch i or epochi + 1, the trivial win condition is met and the
adversary loses.
(Step 2.) We consider a modiﬁed game GPRF which is the same as Gi except for: the ﬁrst element of
ciphertexts given to the adversary in epoch i is a uniformly random element inY. More precisely, in epoch i,
whenAi asks forO.Enc,O.Upd or a challenge-equal ciphertext to gameGb
PRF:
• AnO.Enc(M) query: randomly choose a nonce N $← −X\X, set X ← X∪{ N}, randomly choose
C1
i
$← −Y, compute C2
i← SKE.E(k2
i, N), setL←L∪{ (·, Ci,i ; N, M)}. Output Ci.
• AnO.Upd(Ci−1) query: proceed if (·, Ci−1,i− 1; N, M)∈L . If N∈ X, then abort the game; oth-
erwise, set X ← X∪{ N}, randomly choose C1
i
$← − Y, compute C2
i ← SKE.E(k2
i, N), set L ←
L∪{ (·, Ci,i ; N, M)}. Output Ci.
• A challenge-equal ciphertext (with the underlying challenge input( ¯M0, ¯C)): proceed if (·, ¯C, ˜e−1; N1, ¯M1)∈
L. If N1 ∈ X, then abort the game; otherwise, set X ← X∪{ N1}. Randomly choose a nonce
N0
$← − X\X, set X ← X∪{ N0}, randomly choose C1
i
$← − Y, compute ˜C2
i ← SKE.E(k2
i, Nb),
(˜Ci,i ; Nb, ¯Mb)∈ ˜L. Output ˜Ci.
We wish to prove that
|Pr[Gi = 1]− Pr[Gi−1 = 1]|≤ AdvGPRF(λ) + 2AdvPRF
F,BPRF
6a
(λ) + 2QE2
|X| .
If the following results are true, then we have the above result.
|Pr[Gi = 1]− Pr[G1
PRF = 1]|≤ AdvPRF
F,BPRF
6a
(λ) + QE2
|X|
52
and
|Pr[Gi−1 = 1]− Pr[G0
PRF = 1]|≤ AdvPRF
F,BPRF
6a
(λ) + QE2
|X| .
We construct an PRF adversaryBPRF
6a , detailed in Fig. 37, against F to simulate the responses of queries made
byAi.
The reduction does appropriate bookkeeping for the nonce, message, and ciphertexts in listL. Speciﬁcally,
in epoch i,BPRF
6a collects used nonces in list X (initiated as empty set). Initially, the reduction ﬂips a coin
b $← −{0, 1}, simulates the challenge response with ¯M0 if b = 0 ; otherwise, simulates the challenge response
with ¯C. The reduction BPRF
6a generates all keys and tokens except for k1
i . In epoch i,BPRF
6a calls its PRF
challenger for help computing F(k1
i, N).
EventuallyBPRF
6a receives b′ fromAi, and if b′ = b, thenBPRF
6a guesses that it is interacting with the ‘real’
PRF, i.e. outputs 0 to the PRF challenger, otherwiseBPRF
6a outputs 1.
WhenBPRF
6a interacts with ExpPRF-0
F,BPRF
6a
, the simulation ofGi−1 (if b = 0) orGi (if b = 1) is perfect except
if a nonce collision during the game has caused an abort, this term is bounded by QE2
|X| . WhenBPRF
6a interacts
with ExpPRF-1
F,BPRF
6a
, the simulation ofGb
PRF toAi is perfect. We have the desired result.
(Step 3.) SupposeAi is an adversary trying to distinguish gameG0
PRF from gameG1
PRF. Then we construct
a reductionBIND-CPA
6b , detailed in Fig. 38, playing the IND-CPA game that runsAi. We claim that
AdvGPRF
Ai (λ)≤ AdvIND-CPA
BIND-CPA
6b
(λ).
ReductionBIND-CPA
6b generates all keys and tokens except for ki. In epoch i,BIND-CPA
6b uses the IND-CPA
challenger for assistance in computing SKE.E(k2
i, N). In epoch i, the reduction forwards all nonces ofO.Enc
andO.Upd to the IND-CPA challenger, and sets the reply in the second part of ciphertext, i.e.C2
i . For challenge
input ( ¯M, ¯C), suppose ¯C has the underlying nonce N1,BIND-CPA
6b chooses nonce N0 while encrypting M, sends
(N0, N1) to the IND-CPA challenger as challenge input, and sets the reply in the second part of the challenge
ciphertext. The following shows howBIND-CPA
6b simulates the responses of queries made byAi:
Eventually,BIND-CPA
6b sends the guess bit ofA to the IND-CPA challenger. We have the required result.
Situation 2. Suppose the adversary knows none of the secret keys and tokens in epoch e∗∈I∗.
Since the adversary never knows the nonce in the challenge ¯C, we do not need to worry if the adversary
knows a token in the challenge epoch or the next epoch will make the adversary trivially win the game.
We use the ﬁrewall technique to construct hybrid games: in hybrid i, we embed within the i-th insulated
region. This means that to the left of thei-th insulated region the game responds with an update of the challenge
input ciphertext and to the right of thei-th insulated region it gives an encryption of the challenge input message.
Similarly the advantage AdvweakIND-UE-CPA
BLMR+,A (λ) is upper bounded by (n + 1)2·| Pr[G1
l = 1]− Pr[G0
1 = 1]|.
For any 1≤i≤l, we prove that
|Pr[G1
i = 1]− Pr[G0
i = 1]|≤ AdvIND-CPA
SKE,BIND-CPA
6b
(λ) + 2AdvPRF
F,BPRF
6a
(λ) + 2QE2
|X| .
SupposeAi is an adversary trying to distinguish gameG0
i from gameG1
i in hybridi.
As the above step 2 proof, we consider a modiﬁed hybrid game in which the ﬁrst element of ciphertexts in
epoch fwli is a uniformly random element in Y. The difference here is that if Ai asks for encryption queries
or challenge queries in an epoch within the i-th insulated region, the reduction will simulate these queries in
epoch fwli and then output the updated version (updated from epoch fwli to the queried epoch). Since the
update algorithm of BLMR+ is deterministic, this simulation is valid.
Similarly we can prove the modiﬁed hybrid game is indistinguishable from the original hybrid game, and
that the distinguishing advantage is upper bounded by the PRF advantage. Finally, similarly to the above step
3 proof (the difference is the same as the difference mentioned in the former paragraph), the advantage is upper
bounded by IND-CPA advantage of SKE. We have the following result:
AdvweakIND-UE-CPA
BLMR+,A (λ)≤ (n + 1)3·
(
AdvIND-CPA
SKE,BIND-CPA
6b
(λ) + 2AdvPRF
F,BIND-CPA
6b
(λ) + 2QE2
|X|
)
.
53
ReductionBPRF
6a playing ExpPRF-b
F,B6a in hybrid i
1 : do Setup
2 : ¯M0, ¯C←AO.Enc,O.Next,O.Upd,O.Corr(λ)
3 : phase← 1
4 : Create ˜C with ( ¯M0, ¯C), get ˜C˜e
5 : b ′←AO.Enc,O.Next,O.Upd,O.Corr,O.Upd˜C(˜C˜e)
6 : ifI∗∩ (K∗∪T ∗) =∅
7 : return ABORT
8 : twf← 1 if
9 : C∗∩K∗⁄=∅ or I∗∩C∗⁄=∅ or
10 : ( ∃e∈C∗ : e∈T ∗ or e + 1∈T ∗)
11 : if ABORT occurred or twf = 1
12 : b ′ $
← −{0, 1}
13 : return b′
14 : if b′ = b
15 : return 0
16 : else
17 : return 1
Setup(λ)
18 : b
$
← −{0, 1}
19 : ∆ 0←⊥; e← 0; phase, twf← 0
20 : L, ˜L,C,K,T,X ←∅
21 : forj∈{ 0, ...,n} do
22 : k ¶
j
$
← −BLMR+.KG(λ)
23 : ∆ ⋄
j+1
$
← −BLMR+.TG(kj, kj+1)
O.Enc(M)
24 : if e⁄=i
25 : C e← BLMR+.Enc(ke, M)
26 : if e =i
27 : N
$
← −X\X;X←X∪{ N}
28 : cally←O.f(N)
29 : C 1
i←y⊗ M / /embed
30 : C 2
i← SKE.E(k2
i, N)
31 : C i← (C1
i, C2
i )
32 : L←L∪{ (·, Ce, e; N, M)}
33 : return Ce
O.Next
34 : e← e + 1
O.Upd(Ce-1)
35 : if (·, Ce-1, e-1; N, M)⁄∈L or (e =i and N∈X)
36 : return ⊥
37 : if e⁄=i,i + 1
38 : C e← BLMR+.Upd(∆e, Ce-1)
39 : if e =i + 1
40 : C e← (F(k1
e, N)⊗ M, SKE.E(k2
e, N))
41 : if e =i
42 : X←X∪{ N}
43 : cally←O.f(N); C 1
i←y⊗ M / /embed
44 : C 2
i← SKE.E(k2
i, N)
45 : C i← (C1
i, C2
i )
46 : L←L∪{ (·, Ce, e; N, M)}
47 : return Ce
O.Corr(inp, ˆe)
48 : if ˆe> e or e =i or (e =i+1 and inp = token)
49 : return ⊥
50 : if inp = key
51 : K←K∪{ ˆe}
52 : return kˆe
53 : if inp = token
54 : T ←T ∪{ˆe}
55 : return ∆ˆe
Create ˜C with ( ¯M0, ¯C)
56 : if (·, ¯C, ˜e− 1; N1, ¯M1)⁄∈L or N1∈X
57 : return ⊥
58 : N 0
$
← −X\(X∪{ N1}); X←X∪{ N0, N1}
59 : callyb←O.f(Nb); ˜C1
i←yb⊗ ¯Mb / /embed
60 : ˜C2
i← SKE.E(k2
i, Nb)
61 : ˜Ci← (˜C1
i, ˜C2
i )
62 : forj∈{ 0, ...,i− 1} do
63 : ˜Cj← (F(k1
j, N1)⊗ ¯M1, SKE.E(k2
j, N1)) / /left
64 : forj∈{i + 1, ...,n} do
65 : ˜Cj← (F(k1
j, N0)⊗ ¯M0, SKE.E(k2
j, N0)) / /right
66 : ˜L←∪ n
j=0{(˜Cj,j )}
67 : return ˜C˜e
O.Upd ˜C
69 : C←C∪{ e}
70 : ﬁnd (˜Ce, e)∈ ˜L
71 : return ˜Ce
Figure 37: ReductionBPRF
6a for proof of Proposition 6. Recall that in the PRF game in Deﬁnition 3, the oracle
O.f responds to query input N with either F(k, N) or a random value. On line 22, ¶ indicates k1
i are skipped
in the generation; on line 23,⋄ indicates ∆i and ∆i+1 are skipped in the generation.
54
ReductionBIND-CPA
6b playing ExpIND-CPA
SKE,B6b in hybrid i
1 : do Setup
2 : ¯M0, ¯C←AO.Enc,O.Next,O.Upd,O.Corr(λ)
3 : phase← 1
4 : Create ˜C with ( ¯M0, ¯C), get ˜C˜e
5 : b ′←AO.Enc,O.Next,O.Upd,O.Corr,O.Upd˜C(˜C˜e)
6 : if ifI∗∩ (K∗∪T ∗)⁄=∅
7 : return ABORT
8 : twf← 1if
9 : C∗∩K∗⁄=∅ or I∗∩C∗⁄=∅ or
10 : ( ∃e∈C∗ : e∈T ∗ or e + 1∈T ∗)
11 : if ABORT occurred or twf = 1
12 : b ′ $
← −{0, 1}
13 : return b′
14 : if b′ = b
15 : return 0
16 : else
17 : return 1
Setup(λ)
18 : b
$
← −{0, 1}
19 : ∆ 0←⊥; e← 0; phase, twf← 0
20 : L, ˜L,C,K,T,X ←∅
21 : forj∈{ 0, ...,n} do
22 : k ⊛
j
$
← −BLMR+.KG(λ)
23 : ∆ ⋄
j+1
$
← −BLMR+.TG(kj, kj+1)
O.Enc(M)
24 : if e⁄=i
25 : C e← BLMR+.Enc(ke, M)
26 : if e =i
27 : N
$
← −X\X;X←X∪{ N}
28 : C 1
i
$
← −Y
29 : cally←O.E(N)
30 : C 2
i←y / /embed
31 : C i← (C1
i, C2
i )
32 : L←L∪{ (·, Ce, e; N, M)}
33 : return Ce
O.Next
34 : e← e + 1
O.Upd(Ce-1)
35 : if (·, Ce-1, e-1; N, M)⁄∈L or (e =i and N∈X)
36 : return ⊥
37 : if e⁄=i,i + 1
38 : C e← BLMR+.Upd(∆e, Ce-1)
39 : if e =i + 1
40 : C e← (F(k1
e, N)⊗ M, SKE.E(k2
e, N))
41 : if e =i
42 : X←X∪{ N}; C 1
i
$
← −Y
43 : cally←O.E(N); C 2
i←y / /embed
44 : C i← (C1
i, C2
i )
45 : L←L∪{ (·, Ce, e; N, M)}
46 : return Ce
O.Corr(inp, ˆe)
47 : if ˆe> e or e =i or (e =i+1 and inp = token)
48 : return ⊥
49 : if inp = key
50 : K←K∪{ ˆe}
51 : return kˆe
52 : if inp = token
53 : T ←T ∪{ˆe}
54 : return ∆ˆe
Create ˜C with ( ¯M0, ¯C)
55 : if (·, ¯C, ˜e− 1; N1, ¯M1)⁄∈L or N1∈X
56 : return ⊥
57 : N 0
$
← −X\(X∪{ N1}); X←X∪{ N0, N1}
58 : ˜C1
i
$
← −Y
59 : call CHALL with (N0, N1), get ˜C2
i / /embed
60 : ˜Ci← (˜C1
i, ˜C2
i )
61 : forj∈{ 0, ...,i− 1} do
62 : ˜Cj← (F(k1
j, N1)⊗ ¯M1, SKE.E(k2
j, N1)) / /left
63 : forj∈{i + 1, ...,n} do
64 : ˜Cj← (F(k1
j, N0)⊗ ¯M0, SKE.E(k2
j, N0)) / /right
65 : ˜L←∪ n
j=0{(˜Cj,j )}
66 : return ˜C˜e
O.Upd ˜C
67 : C←C∪{ e}
68 : ﬁnd(˜Ce, e)∈ ˜L
69 : return ˜Ce
Figure 38: Reduction BIND-CPA
6b for proof of Proposition 6; the simulation is almost the same as BPRF
6a except
for the underlined simulations. Recall that in the IND-CPA game in Deﬁnition 14, the encryption oracle O.E
replies to input N with SKE.Enc(k, N). On line 22, ⊛ indicates ki is skipped in the generation; on line 23, ⋄
indicates ∆i and ∆i+1 are skipped in the generation.
55
C The RISE Scheme of Lehmann and Tackmann
In this section we discuss the Elgamal-based updatable encryption scheme RISE, developed by Lehmann and
Tackmann [LT18a] and given in Fig. 39. LT18 showed10 that RISE is randIND-ENC and randIND-UPD-CPA,
under DDH. KLR19 observed that for RISE, knowledge of an update token allows the storage host to create
arbitrary ciphertexts for messages of its choice: this is a very undesirable feature for an UE scheme, and is not
possible for SHINE. This emphasizes the importance of ciphertext integrity for UE schemes.
RISE.KG(λ)
1 : x
$
← −Z∗
q
2 : k e← (x,g x)
3 : return ke
RISE.TG(ke, ke+1)
4 : parse ke = (x,y )
5 : parse ke+1 = (x′,y′)
6 : ∆ e+1← (x′
x,y′)
7 : return ∆e+1
RISE.Enc(ke, M)
8 : parse ke = (x,y )
9 : r
$
← −Zq
10 : C e← (yr,g r· M)
11 : return Ce
RISE.Dec(ke, Ce)
12 : parse ke = (x,y )
13 : parse Ce = (C1, C2)
14 : M ′← C2· C−1/x
1
15 : return M′
RISE.Upd(∆e+1, Ce)
16 : parse ∆e+1 = (∆,y′)
17 : parse Ce = (C1, C2)
18 : r′ $
← −Zq
19 : C ′
1← C∆
1 ·y′r′
20 : C ′
2← C2·gr′
21 : C e+1← (C′
1, C′
2)
22 : return Ce+1
Figure 39: Updatable encryption scheme RISE [LT18a] forλ-bit primeq.
C.1 RISE is randIND-UE-CPA Secure
We show thatRISE is randIND-UE-CPA under DDH. First, we adapt (an extended version of) the Oracle-DDH
experiment to the epoch-based corruption model found in updatable encryption, in a way that ensures that it
still reduces to DDH. In this way, we lift a lot of the bookkeeping and complexity. Then, the reduction from
randIND-UE-CPA to this oracle-based game is straightforward. We believe that this two-step proof strategy
may be useful for proving security of other UE schemes, under any of the security notions discussed so far.
Oracle-Decision-Difﬁe Hellman for RISE. We give an experimentO-DDHRISE, where each exponent repre-
sents an epoch key, and corruption of keys and tokens is represented: the game allows the adversary to acquire
the difference of two exponents in the form ti = ei
ei−1
. In each ‘epoch’ the adversary can possibly ask for a
challenge viaO.Chall, which returns either a ‘real’ DDH tuple, with the epoch key deﬁned as one of the expo-
nents, or a random tuple. The game is given in Fig. 40. Just as in the games for UE, the challenger keeps track
of the epochs in which the adversary has access to ‘updates’ of the ‘challenge’ (viaCL∗), and access to the keys
(exponents, via EL∗). If these overlap then the adversary can trivially extract from the challenge value whether
it is ‘real’ or ‘random’ and win, so this is of course ruled out. The syntax also follows the UE games in the sense
that once the adversary asks for a challenge, it can only ask for ‘later’ challenges (i.e. with a higher index) from
this oracle – it can of course move this challenge ‘backwards’ into earlier epochs/indices by applying ‘token’t.
Deﬁnition 15. Fix a cyclic group G of prime order q with generator g. The advantage of an algorithm A
solving the Oracle-Decision Difﬁe-Hellman for RISE (O-DDHRISE) problem for G andg is
AdvO-DDHRISE
G,A =
⏐⏐⏐Pr[ExpO-DDHRISE-1
G,A (λ) = 1]− Pr[ExpO-DDHRISE-0
G,A (λ) = 1]
⏐⏐⏐
where the experiment ExpO-DDHRISE-b
G,A is given in Fig. 40.
10On 19th December 2019, the authors updated the full version of their paper [LT18b] to include a new proof of randIND-ENC
security, ﬁxing a ﬂaw in the prior proof methodology.
56
ExpO-DDHRISE-b
G,A (λ)
1 : phase,i∗← 0
2 : EL∗, CL∗←∅
3 : if b = 1
4 : w1, ...,w n
$
← −Z∗
q
5 : else
6 : w1, ...,w n← 0
7 : e1, ..., en
$
← −Z∗
q
8 : x1, ...,x n
$
← −Z∗
q
9 : fori∈{ 0, ...n} do
10 : si←gei
11 : Xi←gxi
12 : b ′←AO.Open,O.Difr,O.Chall(g,{s1, ..., sn})
13 : if EL∗∩ CL∗⁄=∅
14 : b ′ $
← −{0, 1}
15 : return b′
O.Open(i)
16 : update EL∗
17 : return ei
O.Difr(i)
18 : ti← ei
ei−1
19 : update EL∗, CL∗
O.Chall(i)
20 : if phase = 1 andi<i ∗
21 : return ⊥
22 : CL∗← CL∗∪{i}
23 : Zi← sxi
i ·gwi
24 : if phase = 0
25 : i∗←i
26 : phase← 1
27 : return (Xi,Z i)
Figure 40: O-DDHRISE experiment for G of orderq (λ-bit prime) and generatorg.
Proposition 7. Let G be a group of order q (aλ-bit prime) with generator g, and let RISE be the updatable
encryption scheme described in Fig. 39. For any randIND-UE-CPA adversaryA against RISE, there exists an
adversaryB7 against DDH such that
AdvrandIND-UE-CPA
RISE,A (λ) = 2(n + 1)3· AdvDDH
G,B7(λ).
This theorem is proven by Lemmas 7.1 and 7.2.
Lemma 7.1. Let G be a group of order q (a λ-bit prime) with generator g. For any adversary A against
O-DDHRISE, there exists an adversaryB7.1 against DDH such that
AdvO-DDHRISE
G,A (λ) = (n + 1)3· AdvDDH
G,B7.1(λ),
wheren + 1 is the number of exponents in theO-DDHRISE game.
Proof. We use a sequence of game hops and a hybrid argument. Deﬁne gameGb
i as ExpO-DDHRISE-b
G,A except for
O.Chall: if called in index j, ifj <i then return a ‘real’ sample (withwj = 0), and ifj >i return a ‘random
sample’ (wj
$← −Z∗
q). ThusG1
0 is ExpO-DDHRISE-1
G , i.e. all challenges result in ‘random’ DDH tuples, andG0
n is
ExpO-DDHRISE-0
G , i.e. all challenges result in ‘real’ DDH tuples. Thus distinguishingG1
0 fromG0
n is the task of
distinguishing ExpO-DDHRISE-1
G,A from ExpO-DDHRISE-0
G,A for adversaryA.
Notice that all queries inG0
i−1 andG1
i have the equal responses (For j≤ i− 1, returns a real sample. For
j >i− 1, returns a random sample). We have AdvO-DDHRISE
G,A (λ) =∑n
i=0|Pr[G1
i = 1]− Pr[G0
i = 1]|. Then
we prove that|Pr[G1
i = 1]− Pr[G0
i = 1]|≤ (n + 1)2· AdvDDH
G, (λ) for anyi.
LetAi be an adversary trying to distinguish G1
i fromG0
i . For all queries concerning epochs other than i
the responses will be equal in either game, so we assume thatAi asks for a challenge ciphertext in epochi and
this is where we will embed in our reduction. We construct a reductionB7.1, detailed in Fig. 41, that is playing
the standard DDH game (Fig. 2) and runsAi. This reduction guesses the locations of the ﬁrewalls around the
challenge query: ifAi adds any of the epochs within this insulated region to itsEL∗ list then the reduction fails.
fwl and fwr could take any value in{0, ...,n}, so this loss is upper bounded by (n + 1)2.
57
ReductionB7.1 playing ExpDDH-b
G,B7.1(λ) in hybridi
1 : receive (g,X,Y,Z )
2 : fwl, fwr
$
← −{0, ...,n}
3 : wi+1, ...,w n
$
← −Z∗
q
4 : w0, ...,w i−1← 0
5 : si←Y
6 : forj∈{ 0, ...,i -1}∪{ i+1, ...,n} do
7 : xj
$
← −Z∗
q;Xj←gxj
8 : forj∈{ 0, ..., fwl-1}∪{ fwr+1, ...,n} do
9 : ej
$
← −Z∗
q; tj← ej
ej-1
†
; sj←gej
10 : forj∈{ fwl+1, ..., fwr} do
11 : tj
$
← −Z∗
q
12 : forj∈{ fwl, ...,i -1} do
13 : sj←Y− ∏i
k=j+1 tk
14 : forj∈{i+1, ..., fwr} do
15 : sj←Y
∏j
k=i+1 tk
16 : b ′←AO.Open,O.Difr,O.Chall
i (g,{s1, ..., sn})
17 : if ABORT occurred then
18 : return b′ $
← −{0, 1}
19 : return b′
O.Open(j)
20 : if j∈{ fwl, ..., fwr}
21 : return ABORT
22 : return ei
O.Difr(j)
23 : if j∈{ fwl, fwr+1}
24 : return ABORT
25 : return tj
O.Chall(j)
26 : if j =i
27 : Xj←X
28 : Zj←Z
29 : else
30 : Zj← sj
xjgwj
31 : return (Xj,Z j)
Figure 41: Reduction B7.1 for proof of Lemma 7.1. On line 9, † indicates t0 and tfwr+1 are skipped in the
computation.
For all challenge queries smaller than i the reduction needs to faithfully respond with a ‘real’ tuple, that is
the exponent of Zj is the product of the exponent used in sj and the exponent in Xj. These queries must still
be consistent with each other, which is why even though the reduction is free to choosexj it must compute the
correct value of sj. For challenge queries larger thani the reduction produces a random value.
Note that Ai will have its own CL∗ and EL∗ lists and B7.1 will simulate these, however we omit this
calculation for readability.
IfB7.1 is playing ExpDDH-1
G,B7.1 then it receives a random tuple from its challenger and thus provides a random
response toO.Chall(i), creating a perfect simulation ofG1
i toAi. IfB7.1 is playing ExpDDH-0
G,B7.1 then its tuple is
real, providing a perfect simulation ofG0
i . We have the required result.
Lemma 7.2. Let G be a group of order q (a λ-bit prime) with generator g, and let RISE be the updatable
encryption scheme described in Fig. 39. For any randIND-UE-CPA adversaryA against RISE, there exists an
adversaryB7.2 againstO-DDHRISE such that
AdvrandIND-UE-CPA
RISE,A (λ) = 2· AdvO-DDHRISE
G,B7.2 (λ).
Proof. The reductionB7.2 is given in Fig. 42. The reduction B7.2 is playingO-DDHRISE game and runsA.
B7.2 ﬂips a coin b, and simulates ExprandIND-UE-CPA-b
RISE,A by interacting with its ownO-DDHRISE challenger.
To simulate updated non-challenge ciphertexts (i.e. respond toO.Upd queries),B7.2 must track the under-
lying messages for these encryptions so that it can generate valid ‘fresh’ encryptions using the ‘public key’
values{s1, ..., sn} received from itsO-DDHRISE challenger. Since updated non-challenge ciphertexts are of
the form Ce = (sr
e,g r· M), wherer is a fresh random value, the si values allowB7.2 to successfully simulate
updated non-challenge ciphertexts.
58
ReductionB7.2 playing ExpO-DDHRISE
G,B7.2
1 : receiveg,{s1, ..., sn}
2 : e← 0; phase← 0;L←∅
3 : ¯M0, C←AO.Enc,O.Next,O.Upd,O.Corr(λ)
4 : phase← 1
5 : if (·, C = (C1, C2), ˜e− 1; ¯M1)⁄∈L
6 : return ⊥
7 : call (X˜e,Z ˜e)←O.Chall(˜e)
8 : b
$
← −{0, 1}
9 : ˜C← (Z˜e,X ˜e· ¯Mb) / /embed
10 : b ′←AO.Enc,O.Next,O.Upd,O.Corr,O.Upd˜C(˜C)
11 : if b′ = b
12 : return 0
13 : else
14 : return 1
O.Enc(M)
15 : r
$
← −Z∗
q
16 : C e← (sr
e,g r· M)
17 : L←L∪{ (·, Ce,·; M)}
18 : return Ce
O.Next
19 : e← e + 1
O.Upd(Ce−1)
20 : if (·, Ce−1,·; M)⁄∈L
21 : return ⊥
22 : r
$
← −Z∗
q
23 : C e← (sr
e,g r· M)
24 : L←L∪{ (·, Ce,·; M)}
25 : return Ce
O.Corr(inp, ˆe)
26 : if ˆe> e
27 : return ⊥
28 : if inp = key
29 : call eˆe←O.Open(ˆe)
30 : k ˆe← (eˆe,g eˆe)
31 : return kˆe
32 : if inp = token
33 : call tˆe←O.Difr(ˆe)
34 : ∆ ˆe← (tˆe, sˆe)
35 : return ∆ˆe
O.Upd ˜C
36 : call (Xe,Z e)←O.Chall(e)
37 : ˜C← (Ze,X e· ¯Mb)
38 : return ˜Ce
Figure 42: ReductionB7.2 for proof of Lemma 7.2.
To simulate challenge ciphertext (i.e. respond to challenge query or O.Upd ˜C),B7.2 must embed using
its own challenge. Recall that in the O-DDHRISE experiment in Fig. 40, a call to O.Chall(i) will result in
a response Zi = gk˜exi or gk˜exi+wi, and Xi = gxi. When B7.2 receives a challenge query ( ¯M0, C) (where
C = ( gr2k˜e−1,g r2 ¯M1) for some ¯M1) fromA,B7.2 tries to simulate RISE.Enc(k˜e, ¯M0) = ( gr1k˜e,g r1 ¯M0) or
RISE.Upd(∆˜e−1, C) = (C ∆˜e−1
1 gk˜er3, C2gr3) = (gk˜e(r2+r3),g r2+r3 ¯M1), wherer1,r 3 are fresh random values.
B7.2 will embedZ˜e to the ﬁrst part of the challenge ciphertext and embedX˜e to the second part of the challenge
ciphertext, i.e. ˜C˜e = (Z˜e,X ˜e· ¯Mb). Similarly, B7.2 can simulate the response of O.Upd ˜C using the same
approach.
Eventually,B7.2 receives the output bit b′ fromAi. If b′ = b , then B7.2 returns 0 to its O-DDHRISE
challenger, otherwise,B7.2 returns 1.
IfB7.2 interacting with ExpO-DDHRISE-0
G,B7.2 , then it perfectly simulates ExprandIND-UE-CPA-b
RISE,A toA. If B7.2
interacting with ExpO-DDHRISE-1
G,B7.2 , then it wins with probability 1/2. After some computation similar to that in
the proof of Theorem 2.3 we have the desired result.
59