=== PAGE 1 ===
Scalable and Probabilistic Leaderless BFT Consensus through Metastability
Team Rocket, Maofan Yin, Kevin Sekniqi, Robbert van Renesse, Emin Gün Sirer
Cornell University*
Abstract
This paper introduces a family of leaderless Byzantine fault
tolerance protocols, built around a metastable mechanism
via network subsampling. These protocols provide a strong
probabilistic safety guarantee in the presence of Byzantine
adversaries while their concurrent and leaderless nature en-
ables them to achieve high throughput and scalability. Unlike
blockchainsthatrelyonproof-of-work,theyarequiescentand
green. Unlike traditional consensus protocols where one or
morenodestypicallyprocesslinearbitsinthenumberoftotal
nodes per decision, no node processes more than logarithmic
bits. It does not require accurate knowledge of all participants
andexposesnewpossibletradeoﬀsandimprovementsinsafety
and liveness for building consensus protocols.
The paper describes the Snow protocol family, analyzes
its guarantees, and describes how it can be used to construct
the core of an internet-scale electronic payment system called
Avalanche, which is evaluated in a large scale deployment.
Experiments demonstrate that the system can achieve high
throughput(3400tps),providelowconﬁrmationlatency(1.35
sec), and scale well compared to existing systems that deliver
similar functionality. For our implementation and setup, the
bottleneck of the system is in transaction veriﬁcation.
1 Introduction
Achieving agreement among a set of distributed hosts lies at
thecoreofcountlessapplications,rangingfromInternet-scale
services that serve billions of people [13,33] to cryptocur-
rencies worth billions of dollars [1]. To date, there have been
two main families of solutions to this problem. Traditional
consensus protocols rely on all-to-all communication to en-
sure that all correct nodes reach the same decisions with
absolute certainty. Because they usually require quadratic
communication overhead and accurate knowledge of mem-
bership, they have been diﬃcult to scale to large numbers of
participants. On the other hand, Nakamoto consensus proto-
cols [9,27,29,37,45 –48,55–57] have become popular with
the rise of Bitcoin. These protocols provide a probabilistic
safety guarantee: Nakamoto consensus decisions may revert
with some probabilityε. A protocol parameter allows this
*Blasts oﬀ at the speed of light!— Team Rocket
AnearlierversionofthispaperpublishedonMay16th2018,IPFS,wastitled
Snowﬂake to Avalanche: A Novel Metastable Consensus Protocol Family for
Cryptocurrencies.
probability to be rendered arbitrarily small, enabling high-
value ﬁnancial systems to be constructed on this foundation.
This family is a natural ﬁt for open, permissionless settings
where any node can join the system at any time. Yet, these
protocols are costly, wasteful, and limited in performance.
By construction, they cannot quiesce: their security relies
on constant participation by miners, even when there are no
decisions to be made. Bitcoin currently consumes around
63.49 TWh/year [23], about twice as all of Denmark [17].
Moreover, these protocols suﬀer from an inherent scalabil-
ity bottleneck that is diﬃcult to overcome through simple
reparameterization [20].
This paper introduces a new family of consensus protocols
called Snow. Inspired by gossip algorithms, this family gains
its properties through a deliberately metastable mechanism.
Speciﬁcally, the system operates by repeatedly sampling the
network atrandom,andsteering correctnodes towards a com-
monoutcome.Analysisshowsthatthismetastablemechanism
ispowerful:itcanmovealargenetworktoanirreversiblestate
quickly, where the irreversibility implies that a suﬃciently
large portion of the network has accepted a proposal and a
conﬂicting proposalwillnotbe acceptedwithanyhigherthan
negligible (ε) probability.
Similar to Nakamoto consensus, the Snow protocol family
provides a probabilistic safety guarantee, using a tunable se-
curityparameterthatcanrenderthepossibilityofaconsensus
failure arbitrarily small. Unlike Nakamoto consensus, the pro-
tocols are green, quiescent and eﬃcient; they do not rely on
proof-of-work[26]anddonotconsumeenergywhenthereare
nodecisionstobemade.Theeﬃciencyoftheprotocolsstems
partlyfromremovingtheleaderbottleneck:eachnoderequires
O(1)communicationoverheadperroundand O(log n)rounds
in expectation, whereas classical consensus protocols have
oneormorenodesthatrequire O(n)communicationperround
(phase). Further, the Snow family tolerates discrepancies in
knowledge of membership, as we discuss later. In contrast,
classical consensus protocols require the full and accurate
knowledge ofn as its safety foundation.
Snow’s subsampled voting mechanism has two additional
propertiesthatimproveon previous approachesforconsensus.
Whereas the safety of quorum-based approaches breaks down
immediately when the predetermined thresholdf is exceeded,
Snow’sprobabilisticsafetyguaranteedegradessmoothlywhen
Byzantine participants exceed f. This makes it easier to
pick the critical thresholdf. It also exposes new tradeoﬀs
betweensafetyandliveness:theSnowfamilyismoreeﬃcient
when the fraction of Byzantine nodes is small, and it can be
1
arXiv:1906.08936v2  [cs.DC]  24 Aug 2020
=== PAGE 2 ===
parameterized to tolerate more than a third of the Byzantine
nodes by trading oﬀ liveness.
To demonstrate the potential of this protocol family, we
illustrate a practical peer-to-peer payment system, Avalanche.
In eﬀect, Avalanche executes multiple Snowball (one from
the Snow family) instances with the aid of a Directed Acyclic
Graph (DAG). The DAG serves to piggyback multiple in-
stances, reducing the cost fromO(log n) to O(1) per node
and streamlining the path where there are no conﬂicting
transactions.
Overall, the main contribution of this paper is to introduce
a brand new family of consensus protocols, based on ran-
domized sampling and metastable decision. The next section
provides the model, goals and necessary assumptions for the
new protocols. Section 3 gives intuition behind the protocols,
followedbytheirfullspeciﬁcation,Section4providesmethod-
ology used by our formal analysis of safety and liveness in
Appendix A, Section 5 describes Avalanche, a Bitcoin-like
payment system, Section 6 evaluates Avalanche, Section 7
presents related work, and ﬁnally, Section 8 summarizes our
contributions.
2 Model and Goals
Key Guarantees
Safety Unlike classical consensus protocols, and similar to
longest-chain-based consensus protocols such as Nakamoto
consensus [45], we adopt anε-safety guarantee that is proba-
bilistic. In practice, this probabilistic guarantee is as strong as
traditionalsafetyguarantees,sinceappropriatelysmallchoices
of ε can render consensus failure negligible, lower than the
probabilityofhardwarefailureduetorandomevents.Figure1
shows how the portion (f /n) of misbehaving participants (or
computation power) aﬀects the probability of system safety
failure (decision of two conﬂicting proposals), given a choice
of ﬁnality.
Liveness All our protocols provide a non-zero probability
guarantee of termination within a bounded amount of time.
This bounded guarantee is similar to various protocols such
as Ben-Or [8] and longest-chain protocols. In particular,
for Nakamoto consensus, the number of required blocks for
a transaction increases exponentially with the number of
adversarial nodes, with an asymptote atf = n/2 wherein
the number is inﬁnite. In other words, the time required
for ﬁnality approaches∞ as f approaches n/2 (Figure 3).
Furthermore, the required number of rounds is calculable
aheadoftime,astoallowthesystemdesignertotuneliveness
at the expense of safety. Lastly, unlike traditional consensus
protocolsandsimilartoNakamoto,ourprotocolsbeneﬁtfrom
lower adversarial presence, as discussed in property P3 below.
Formal Guarantees: Let the system be parameterized for
an ε safety failure probability under a maximum expected
f number of adversarial nodes. LetO(log n) < tmax < ∞ be
the upper bound of the execution of the protocols. The Snow
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Percentage of Byzantine Nodes ( f /n)
0.0
0.5
1.0
Failure Probability
3f + 1 classical
Bitcoin
Snowﬂake-7
Snowﬂake-8
Figure 1: Classical BFT protocols that toleratef failures will
encounter total safety failure when the threshold is exceeded
even by one additional node. The Bitcoin curve shows a
typical ﬁnality choice for Bitcoin where a block is considered
ﬁnal when it is “buried” in a branch having 6 additional
blocks compared to any other competing forks. Snowﬂake
belongs to the Snow family, and it is conﬁgured withk = 10,
β = 150. Snowﬂake-7,8 usesα = 7 and α = 8 respectively
(see Section 3 for the deﬁnition ofk, αand β.
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Percentage of Byzantine Nodes ( f /n)
10□107
10□50
10□20
100
Failure Probability
3f + 1 classical
Bitcoin
Snowﬂake-7
Snowﬂake-8
Figure 2: Figure 1 with log-scaled y-axis.
0.0 0.1 0.3 0.5
101
102
103
Number of Blocks
0.0 0.1 0.3 0.5
101
102
103
Number of RoundsBitcoin Snowﬂake
α = 7
α = 8
Percentage of Byzantine Nodes ( f /n)
Figure3:Therelationbetween f /nandtheconvergencespeed,
given ε = 10−20.Theleftﬁgureshowstheexpectednumberof
blocks to guaranteeεin Bitcoin, which, counter to commonly
accepted folk wisdom, is not a constant6, but depends on
adversary size to withhold the sameε. The right ﬁgure shows
themaximumnumberofroundsrequiredbySnowﬂake,where
being diﬀerent from Bitcoin, the asymptote is below0.5 and
varies by the choice of parameters.
protocols then provide the following guarantees:
P1. Safety.When decisions are made by any two correct
nodes, they decide on conﬂicting transactions with negligible
2
=== PAGE 3 ===
probability (≤ ε).
P2. Liveness (Upper Bound).Snow protocols terminate
with a strictly positive probability withintmax rounds.
P3. Liveness (Strong Form).If f≤ O(√n), then the Snow
protocolsterminatewithhighprobability( ≥ 1− ε)in O(log n)
rounds.
Network In the standard deﬁnition of asynchrony [8], mes-
sage transmission time is ﬁnite, but the distribution is unspec-
iﬁed (and thus the delivery time can be unbounded for some
messages). This implies that the scheduling of message trans-
mission itself could behave arbitrarily, and potentially even
maliciously(withfullasynchrony).Weuseamodiﬁedversion
of this model, which is well-accepted [7,25,28,35,41] in the
analysis of epidemic networks and gossip-based stochastic
systems.Inparticular,weﬁxthedistributionofmessagedelay
tothatoftheexponentialdistribution.Wenotethat,justlikein
the standard asynchronous model, there is a strictly non-zero
probability that any correct node may execute its next local
roundonlyafteranarbitrarilylargeamountoftimehaspassed.
Furthermore, we also note that scheduling only applies to
correct nodes, and the adversary may execute arbitrarily, as
discussed later.
Achieving Liveness Classical consensus that works with
asynchrony does not get stuck in a single phase of voting
because the vote initiator always polls votes from all known
participants and waits forn− f responses. In our system,
however, nodes operate via subsampling, hence it is possible
for a single sample to select a majority of adversarial nodes,
and therefore the node gets stuck waiting for the responses.
To ensure liveness, a node should be able to wait with some
timeout. Therefore, our protocols are synchronous in order to
guarantee liveness. Lastly, it is worth noting that Nakamoto
consensus is synchronous, in which the required diﬃculty
of proof-of-work is dependent on the maximum network
delay [46].
Adversary The adversarial nodes execute under their own
internal scheduler, which is unbounded in speed, meaning
that all adversarial nodes can execute at any inﬁnitesimally
small point in time, unlike correct nodes. The adversary can
view the state of every honest node at all times and can
instantly modify the state of all adversarial nodes. It cannot,
however, schedule or modify communication between correct
nodes. Finally, we make zero assumptions about the behavior
of the adversary, meaning that it can choose any execution
strategyofitsliking.Inshort,theadversaryiscomputationally
bounded (it cannot forge digital signatures) but otherwise is
point-to-point informationally unbounded (knows all state)
and round-adaptive (can modify its strategy at any time).
SybilAttacks Consensusprotocolsprovidetheirguarantees
based on assumptions that only a fraction of participants are
adversarial. These bounds could be violated if the network is
naivelyleftopentoarbitraryparticipants.Inparticular,aSybil
attack[24],whereinalargenumberofidentitiesaregenerated
by an adversary, could be used to exceed the bounds.
A long line of work, including PBFT [15], treats the Sybil
problemseparatelyfromconsensus,andrightfullyso,asSybil
control mechanisms are distinct from the underlying, more
complex agreement protocol1. In fact, to our knowledge, only
Nakamoto-style consensus has “baked-in” Sybil prevention
as part of its consensus, made possible by chained proof-
of-work [5], which requires miners to continuously stake a
hardware investment. Other protocols, discussed in Section 7,
rely on proof-of-stake (by economic argument) or proof-of-
authority (by administrative argument that makes the system
“permissioned”). The consensus protocols presented in this
papercanadoptanySybilcontrolmechanism,althoughproof-
of-stake is most aligned with their quiescent operation. One
can use an already established proof-of-stake based mecha-
nism[30].ThefulldeploymentofanautonomousP2Ppayment
system incorporating staking mechanism is beyond the scope
of this paper, whose focus is on a novel design paradigm of
the core consensus algorithm.
Flooding Attacks Flooding/spam attacks are a problem for
any distributed system. Without a protection mechanism, an
attacker can generate large numbers of transactions and ﬂood
protocol data structures, consuming storage. There are a mul-
titude of techniques to deter such attacks, including network-
layer protection, proof-of-authority, local proof-of-work and
economic mechanisms. In Avalanche, we use transaction fees,
making such attacks costly even if the attacker is sending
money back to addresses under its control.
Additional Assumptions We do not assume that all mem-
bers of the network are known to all participants, but rather
may temporarily have some discrepancies in network view.
We quantify the bounds on the discrepancy in Appendix A.7.
We assume a safe bootstrapping mechanism, similar to that of
Bitcoin, that enables a node to connect with suﬃciently many
correct nodes to acquire a statistically unbiased view of the
network. We do not assume a PKI. Finally, we make standard
cryptographic assumptions related to digital signatures and
hash functions.
3 Protocol Design
We start with a non-BFT protocol called Slush and progres-
sively build up to Snowﬂake and Snowball, all based on the
same common majority-based metastable voting mechanism.
These protocols are single-decree consensus protocols of in-
creasing robustness. We provide full speciﬁcations for the
protocols in this section, and defer the analysis to the next
section, and present formal proofs in the appendix.
1Thisisnottoimplythateveryconsensusprotocolcanbecoupled/decoupled
with every Sybil control mechanism.
3
=== PAGE 4 ===
1: procedure onQuery(v, col′)
2: if col =⊥then col := col′
3: respond(v, col)
4: procedure slushLoop(u, col0∈{ R, B,⊥})
5: col := col0 // initialize with a color
6: for r∈{ 1 . . .m}do
7: // if⊥, skip untilonQuerysets the color
8: if col =⊥then continue
9: // randomly sample from the known nodes
10: K := sample(N\u, k)
11: P := [query(v, col) for v∈ K ]
12: for col′∈{ R, B} do
13: if P.count(col′)≥ αthen
14: col := col′
15: accept(col)
Figure 4: Slush protocol. Timeouts elided for readability.
3.1 Slush: Introducing Metastability
Thecoreofourapproachisasingle-decreeconsensusprotocol,
inspired by epidemic or gossip protocols. The simplest proto-
col, Slush, is the foundation of this family, shown in Figure 4.
Slush isnot tolerant to Byzantine faults, only crash-faults
(CFT), but serves as an illustration for the BFT protocols that
follow. For ease of exposition, we will describe the operation
of Slush using a decision between two conﬂicting colors, red
and blue.
In Slush, a node starts out initially in an uncolored state.
Uponreceivingatransactionfromaclient,anuncolorednode
updates its own color to the one carried in the transaction
and initiates a query. To perform a query, a node picks a
small, constant sized (k) sample of the network uniformly at
random, and sends a query message. Upon receiving a query,
anuncolorednodeadoptsthecolorinthequery,respondswith
that color, and initiates its own query, whereas a colored node
simply responds with its current color. Once the querying
node collectsk responses, it checks if a fraction≥ α are for
the same color, whereα >⌊k/2⌋ is a protocol parameter. If
the αthreshold is met and the sampled color diﬀers from the
node’sowncolor,thenodeﬂipstothatcolor.Itthengoesback
to the query step, and initiates a subsequent round of query,
for a total ofm rounds. Finally, the node decides the color it
ended up with at timem.
Slush has a few properties of interest. First, it is almost
memoryless: a node retains no state between rounds other
than its current color, and in particular maintains no history
of interactions with other peers. Second, unlike traditional
consensus protocols that query every participant, every round
involves sampling just a small, constant-sized slice of the
network at random. Third, Slush makes progress under any
networkconﬁguration(evenfullybivalentstate,i.e.50/50split
between colors), since random perturbations in sampling will
cause one color to gain a slight edge and repeated samplings
afterwardswillbuilduponandamplifythatimbalance.Finally,
if mischosenhighenough,Slushensuresthatallnodeswillbe
coloredidenticallywithhighprobability(whp).Eachnodehas
1: procedure snowflakeLoop(u, col0∈{ R, B,⊥})
2: col := col0, cnt := 0
3: whileundecided do
4: if col =⊥then continue
5: K := sample(N\u, k)
6: P := [query(v, col) for v∈ K ]
7: maj := false
8: for col′∈{ R, B} do
9: if P.count(col′)≥ αthen
10: maj := true
11: if col′⁄= col then
12: col := col′, cnt := 1
13: else cnt++
14: if cnt≥ βthen accept(col′)
15: if maj = false then cnt := 0
Figure 5: Snowﬂake.
a constant, predictable communication overhead per round,
and mgrows logarithmically withn.
The Slush protocol does not provide a strong safety guaran-
tee in the presence of Byzantine nodes. In particular, if the
correct nodes develop a preference for one color, a Byzantine
adversary can attempt to ﬂip nodes to the opposite so as
to keep the network in balance, preventing a decision. We
address this in our ﬁrst BFT protocol that introduces more
state storage at the nodes.
3.2 Snowﬂake: BFT
Snowﬂake augments Slush with a single counter that captures
the strength of a node’s conviction in its current color. This
per-node counter stores how many consecutive samples of the
network by that node have all yielded the same color. A node
accepts the current color when its counter reachesβ, another
security parameter. Figure 5 shows the amended protocol,
which includes the following modiﬁcations:
1. Each node maintains a countercnt;
2. Upon every color change, the node resetscnt to 0;
3. Upon every successful query that yields≥ αresponses for
the same color as the node, the node incrementscnt.
When the protocol is correctly parameterized for a given
threshold of Byzantine nodes and a desiredε-guarantee, it
can ensure both safety (P1) and liveness (P2, P3). As we later
show,thereexistsanirreversiblestateafterwhichadecisionis
inevitable.Correctnodesbegintocommitpasttheirreversible
state to adopt the same color, whp. For additional intuition,
which we do not expand in this paper, there also exists a
phase-shift point, where the Byzantine nodes lose ability to
keep network in a bivalent state.
3.3 Snowball: Adding Conﬁdence
Snowﬂake’s notion of state is ephemeral: the counter gets
resetwitheverycolorﬂip.SnowballaugmentsSnowﬂakewith
conﬁdence countersthat capture the number of queries that
have yielded a threshold result for their corresponding color
(Figure 6). A node decides if it getsβ consecutive chits for a
4
=== PAGE 5 ===
1: procedure snowballLoop(u, col0∈{ R, B,⊥})
2: col := col0, lastcol := col0, cnt := 0
3: d[R] := 0, d[B] := 0
4: whileundecided do
5: if col =⊥then continue
6: K := sample(N\u, k)
7: P := [query(v, col) for v∈ K ]
8: maj := false
9: for col′∈{ R, B} do
10: if P.count(col′)≥ αthen
11: maj := true
12: d[col′]++
13: if d[col′] > d[col]then
14: col := col′
15: if col′⁄= lastcol then
16: lastcol := col′, cnt := 1
17: else cnt++
18: if cnt≥ βthen accept(col′)
19: if maj = false then cnt := 0
Figure 6: Snowball.
color. However, it only changes preference based on the total
accrued conﬁdence. The diﬀerences between Snowﬂake and
Snowball are as follows:
1. Upon every successful query, the node increments its con-
ﬁdence counter for that color.
2. A node switches colors when the conﬁdence in its current
color becomes lower than the conﬁdence value of the new
color.
4 Analysis
Duetospacelimits,wemovesomecoredetailstoAppendixA,
where we show that under certain independent and distinct
assumptions, the Snow family of consensus protocols provide
safety(P1)andliveness(P2,P3)properties.Inthissection,we
summarize our core results and provide some proof sketches.
Notation Let the network consist of a set ofn nodes (rep-
resented by setN), wherec are correct nodes (represented
by setC) and f are Byzantine nodes (represented by setB).
Let u, v∈ C refertoanytwo correctnodesin thenetwork. Let
k, α, β∈ Z+ be positive integers whereα >⌊k/2⌋. From now
on, kwillalwaysrefertothenetworksamplesize,where k≤ n,
and α will be the majority threshold required to consider the
voting experiment a “success”. In general, we will refer to
S as the state (or conﬁguration) of the network at any given
time.
Modelling Framework To formally model our protocols,
weusecontinuous-timeMarkovprocesses(CTMC).Thestate
space is enumerable (and ﬁnite), and state transitions occur in
continuous time. CTMCs naturally model our protocols since
state transitions do not occur in epochs and in lockstep for
every node (at the end of every time unit) but rather occur at
any time and independently of each other.
We focus on binary consensus, although the safety results
generalize to more than two values. We can think of the
network as a set of nodes either colored red or blue, and we
will refer to this conﬁguration at timet as St. We model
our protocols through a continuous-time process with two
absorbing states, where either all nodes are red or all nodes
are blue. The state spaceS of the stochastic process is a
condensed version of the full conﬁguration space, where each
state{0, . . . ,n} represents the total number of blue nodes in
the system.
The simpliﬁcation that allows us to analyze this system is
to obviate the need to keep track of all of the execution paths,
as well as all possible adversarial strategies, and rather focus
entirely on a single state of interest, without regards to how
we achieve this state. More speciﬁcally, the core extractable
insight of our analysis is in identifying theirreversibilitystate
ofthesystem,thestateuponwhichsomanycorrectnodeshave
usurped either red or blue that reverting back to the minority
color is highly unlikely.
4.1 Safety
Slush We assume that all nodes share the sameN, and
in Appendix A.7, we sketch how to relax the requirement
of the membership knowledge. We model the dynamics of
the system through a continuous-time process where two
states are absorbing, namely the all-red or all-blue state. Let
{Xt≥0} be the random variable that describes the state of
the system at timet, where X0∈{ 0, . . . ,c}. We begin by
immediatelydiscussingthemostimportantresultofthesafety
dynamics of our processes: thereversibilityprobabilities of
theSlushprocess.Alltheotherformalresultsinthispaperare,
informally speaking, intuitive derivations and augmentations
of this result.
Theorem 1.Let the conﬁguration of the system at timet be
St = n/2 + δ,meaningthatthenetworkhasdriftedto 2δmore
blue nodes than rednodes (δ = 0means thatredandblue are
equal). Letξδ be the probability of absorption to the all-red
state (minority). Then, for all0≤ δ≤ n/2, we have
ξδ≤
( 1/2− δ/n
α/k
)α( 1/2 + δ/n
1− α/k
)k−α
≤ e−2((α/k)−(1/2)+(δ/n))2k
(1)
Proof. This bound follows from the Hoeﬀding-derived tail
bounds of the hypergeometric distribution by Chvatal [18].
WenotethatChvatal’sboundsareintroducedforsimplicity
ofexpositionandareextremelyweak.Weleavethefullclosed-
form expression in Theorem 2 to the appendix, which is also
signiﬁcantly stronger than the Chvatal bound. Nonetheless,
using the loose Chvatal bound, we make the key observation
thatasthedrift δincreases,givenﬁxedαand k,theprobability
ofmovingtowardstheminorityvaluedecreases exponentially
fast (in fact, even faster, since there is a quadratic term in
5
=== PAGE 6 ===
the inverse exponent). Additionally, the same result holds for
increasing αgiven a ﬁxedk.
The outcomes of this theorem demonstrate a key property:
once the network loses full bivalency (i.e.δ > 0), it tends to
toppleandconvergerapidlytowardsthemajoritycolor,unable
to revert back to the minority with signiﬁcant probability.
This is the fundamental property exploited by our protocols,
and what makes them secure despite only sampling a small,
constant-sized set of the network. The core result that follows
for the safety guarantees in Snowﬂake is in ﬁnding regions
(given speciﬁc parameter choices) where the reversibility
holdswithnohigherthan εprobabilityevenunderadversarial
presence.
Snowﬂake For Snowﬂake, we assume that some fraction
of nodes are adversarial. In Slush, once the network gains
signiﬁcant majority support for one proposal (e.g., the color
blue), it becomes unlikely for a minority proposal (e.g., the
colorred)toeverbecomedecidedinthefuture(irreversibility).
Furthermore, in Slush nodes simply have to execute the proto-
col for a deterministic number of rounds,m, which is known
ahead of protocol execution. When introducing adversarial
nodes with arbitrary strategies, however, nodes cannot simply
execute the protocol for a deterministic number of rounds,
since the adversary may nondeterministically aﬀect the value
of m. Instead, correct nodes must implement a mechanism to
explicitly detect that irreversibility has been reached. To that
end, in Snowﬂake, every correct node implements a decision
function, D(u,St , blue)→{ 0, 1}, which is a random variable
thatoutputs 1ifnode udetectsthatthenetworkhasreachedan
irreversibilitystateattime t forblue.Thedecisionmechanism
isprobabilistic,meaningthatitcanfail,althoughitisdesigned
to do so with negligible probability. We now sketch the proof
of Snowﬂake.
Proof Sketch. We deﬁne safety failure to be the event wherein
any two correct nodesu and v decide on blue and red, i.e.
D(u,St , blue)→ 1and D(v,St′, red)→ 1,foranytwotimes t
and t′.Weagainmodelthesystemasacontinuoustimerandom
process. The state space is deﬁned the same way as in Slush.
However, we note some critical subtleties. First, even if all
correct nodes accept a color, the Byzantine nodes may revert.
Second, we also have to consider the decision mechanism
D(∗). To analyze, we obviate the need to keep track of all
network conﬁgurations under all adversarial strategies and
assume that a nodeu ﬁrst decides on blue. Then, conditioned
on the state of the network uponu deciding, we calculate
the probability that another nodev decides red, which is
a function of both the probability that the network reverts
towards a minority blue state and thatv decides at that state.
We show that under appropriate choices ofk, α, andβ, we
can constructhighly secure instances ofSnowﬂake (i.e. safety
failure with probability≤ ε) when the network reaches some
biasof δ,asshowninFigure7.Aconcreteexampleisprovided
in Figure 1.
0 c/2 c
≤ ε
δ
Figure 7: Representation of the irreversibility state, which
exists when – even underf Byzantine nodes – the number of
blue correct nodes exceeds that of red correct nodes by more
than 2δ.
Snowball Snowball is an improvement in security over
Snowﬂake, where random perturbations in network samples
are reduced by introducing a limited form of history, which
we refer to as conﬁdence.
Proof Sketch. We apply martingale concentration inequalities
to prove that once the system has reached the irreversibility
state,thenthegrowthoftheconﬁdenceofthemajoritydecided
color will perpetually grow and drift further away from those
of the minority color, eﬀectively rendering reversibility less
likely over time. If the drifts ever revert, then reversibility
analysis becomes identical to that of Snowﬂake.
4.2 Liveness
We assume that the observed adversarial presence0≤ f′≤
n(k− α− ψ)/k≤ f, where we refer toψ as the buﬀer zone.
Thebigger ψ,thequickertheabilityofthedecisionmechanism
toﬁnalizeavalue.If,ofcourse, ψapproacheszeroorbecomes
negative, then we violate the upper bound of adversarial
tolerancefortheparameterizedsystem,andthustheadversary
can,withhighprobability,stallterminationbysimplychoosing
to not respond, although the safety guarantees may still hold.
Assuming thatψ is strictly positive, termination is strictly
ﬁnite under all network conﬁgurations where a proposal has
at leastαsupport. Furthermore, not only is termination ﬁnite
withprobabilityone,wealsohaveastrictlypositiveprobability
of termination within any bounded amount of timetmax, as
discussed in Lemma 4, which follows from Theorem 3. This
captures liveness property P2.
Proof Sketch.Using the construction of the system to prove
irreversibility, we characterize the distribution of the average
time spent (sojourn times) at each state before the system
terminates execution by absorption at either absorbing state.
The termination time is then a union of these times.
For non-conﬂicting transactions, since the adversary is
unable to forge a conﬂict, the time to decision is simply the
mixing time , which isO(log n). Liveness guarantees under
a fully bivalent network conﬁguration reduce to an optimal
convergence time ofO(log n) rounds if the adversary is at
most O(√n), forα =⌊k/2⌋ + 1. We leave additional detains
toLemma5.Whentheadversarysurpasses O(√n)nodes,the
worst-casenumberofroundsincreasespolynomially,andas f
approaches n/2 it approaches exponential convergence rates.
Proof Sketch.We modify Theorem 3 to include the adversary,
6
=== PAGE 7 ===
which reverts any imbalances in the network by keeping
network fully bivalent.
Multi-Value Consensus Our binary consensus protocol
could support multi-value consensus by running logarith-
mic binary instances, one for each bit of the proposed value.
However, such theoretical reduction might not be eﬃcient in
practice. Instead, we could directly incorporate multi-values
as multi-colors in the protocol, where safety analysis could
still be generalized.
Forliveness,wesketchaleaderlessinitializationmechanism,
which in expectation usesO(log n)rounds under the assump-
tion that the network is synchronized in the Appendix A.6.
While the design of initialization mechanisms is interesting,
notethatitisnotnecessaryforadecentralizedpaymentsystem,
as we show in Section 5. Finally, in the Appendix A.7, we
discuss churn and view discrepancies.
5 Peer-to-Peer Payment System
UsingSnowballconsensus,wehaveimplementedabare-bones
payment system, Avalanche, which supports Bitcoin transac-
tions. In this section, we describe the design and sketch how
the implementation can support the value transfer primitive
at the center of cryptocurrencies. Deploying a full cryptocur-
rencyinvolvesbootstrapping,minting,staking,unstaking,and
inﬂation control. While we have solutions for these issues,
their full discussion is beyond the scope of this paper, whose
focusiscenteredonthenovelSnowconsensusprotocolfamily.
In a cryptocurrency setting, cryptographic signatures en-
force that only a key owner is able to create a transaction that
spendsaparticularcoin.Sincecorrectclientsfollowtheproto-
col as prescribed and never double spend coins, in Avalanche,
they are guaranteed both safety and liveness for theirvirtuous
transactions. In contrast, liveness is not guaranteed forrogue
transactions, submitted by Byzantine clients, which conﬂict
with one another. Such decisions may stall in the network,
but have no safety impact on virtuous transactions. We show
that this is a sensible tradeoﬀ, and that the resulting system is
suﬃcient for building complex payment systems.
5.1 Avalanche: Adding a DAG
Avalanche consists of multiple single-decree Snowball in-
stances instantiated as a multi-decree protocol that maintains
a dynamic, append-only directed acyclic graph (DAG) of all
known transactions. The DAG has a single sink that is the
genesis vertex. Maintaining a DAG provides two signiﬁcant
beneﬁts. First, it improves eﬃciency, because a single vote
on a DAG vertex implicitly votes for all transactions on the
path to the genesis vertex. Second, it also improves security,
because the DAG intertwines the fate of transactions, similar
to theBitcoin blockchain. This renderspastdecisions diﬃcult
to undo without the approval of correct nodes.
When a client creates a transaction, it names one or more
parents,whichareincludedinseparablyinthetransactionand
form the edges of the DAG. The parent-child relationships
1: procedure init
2: T := ∅ // the set of known transactions
3: Q := ∅ // the set of queried transactions
4: procedure onGenerateTx(data)
5: edges :={T′← T : T′∈ parentSelection(T )}
6: T := Tx(data, edges)
7: onReceiveTx(T)
8: procedure onReceiveTx(T)
9: if T /∈ T then
10: if PT = ∅ then
11: PT :={T}, PT .pref := T
12: PT .last := T,PT .cnt := 0
13: else PT := PT∪{ T}
14: T := T∪{ T}, cT := 0.
Figure 8: Avalanche: transaction generation.
encoded in the DAG may, but do not need to, correspond
to application-speciﬁc dependencies; for instance, a child
transaction need not spend or have any relationship with the
funds received in the parent transaction. We use the term
ancestor setto refer to all transactions reachable via parent
edges back in history, andprogeny to refer to all children
transactions and their oﬀspring.
The central challenge in the maintenance of the DAG is to
choose amongconﬂicting transactions. The notion of conﬂict
is application-deﬁned and transitive, forming an equivalence
relation. In our cryptocurrency application, transactions that
spend the same funds (double-spends) conﬂict, and form a
conﬂict set(shaded regions in Figure 11), out of which only
a single one can be accepted. Note that the conﬂict set of a
virtuous transaction is always a singleton.
AvalancheinstantiatesaSnowballinstanceforeachconﬂict
set. Whereas Snowball uses repeated queries and multiple
counters to capture the amount of conﬁdence built in conﬂict-
ing transactions (colors), Avalanche takes advantage of the
DAG structure and uses a transaction’s progeny. Speciﬁcally,
when a transactionT is queried, all transactions reachable
from T by following the DAG edges are implicitly part of
the query. A node will only respond positively to the query
if T and its entire ancestry are currently the preferred option
in their respective conﬂict sets. If more than a threshold of
responders vote positively, the transaction is said to collect a
chit. Nodes then compute theirconﬁdenceas the total num-
ber of chits in the progeny of that transaction. They query a
transaction just once and rely on new vertices and possible
chits, added to the progeny, to build up their conﬁdence. Ties
are broken by an initial preference for ﬁrst-seen transactions.
NotethatchitsaredecoupledfromtheDAGstructure,making
the protocol immune to attacks where the attacker generates
large, padded subgraphs.
5.2 Avalanche: Speciﬁcation
Each correct node u keeps track of all transactions it has
learned about in setTu, partitioned into mutually exclusive
7
=== PAGE 8 ===
1: procedure avalancheLoop
2: while true do
3: ﬁndT that satisﬁesT∈ T∧ T /∈ Q
4: K := sample(N\u, k)
5: P := ∑v∈K query(v, T )
6: if P≥ α then
7: cT := 1
8: // update the preference for ancestors
9: for T′∈ T : T′ ∗← T do
10: if d(T′) > d(PT′ .pref ) then
11: PT′ .pref := T′
12: if T′⁄= PT′ .last then
13: PT′ .last := T′, PT′ .cnt := 1
14: else
15: ++PT′ .cnt
16: else
17: for T′∈ T : T′ ∗← T do
18: PT′ .cnt := 0
19: // otherwise,cT remains 0 forever
20: Q := Q∪{ T} // mark T as queried
Figure 9: Avalanche: the main loop.
1: function isPreferred(T)
2: return T = PT .pref
3: function isStronglyPreferred(T)
4: return∀T′∈ T , T′ ∗← T : isPreferred(T′)
5: function isAccepted(T)
6: return
((∀T′∈ T , T′← T : isAccepted(T′))
∧| PT| = 1∧ PT .cnt≥ β1) // safe early commitment
∨(PT .cnt≥ β2) // consecutive counter
7: procedure onQuery( j, T)
8: onReceiveTx(T)
9: respond( j, isStronglyPreferred(T ))
Figure 10: Avalanche: voting and decision primitives.
conﬂict setsPT, T∈ Tu. Since conﬂicts are transitive, ifTi
and Tj are conﬂicting, then they belong to the same conﬂict
set, i.e.PTi = PTj. This relation may sound counter-intuitive:
conﬂicting transitions have theequivalencerelation, because
they are equivocations spending thesame funds.
We writeT′← T if T has a parent edge to transactionT′,
The “∗←”-relation is its reﬂexive transitive closure, indicating
a path from T to T′. DAGs built by diﬀerent nodes are
guaranteed to be compatible, though at any one time, the two
nodes may not have a complete view of all vertices in the
system. Speciﬁcally,ifT′← T,then every node in the system
thathas T willalsohave T′ andthesamerelation T′← T;and
conversely, ifT′
← T, then no nodes will end up withT′← T.
Each nodeucan compute a conﬁdence value,du(T ), from
T1
T2 T3
T4 T5
T6
T7
T8 T9
PT1
PT2 = PT3
PT9 = PT6 = PT7
⟨cT1 , d(T1)⟩ =⟨1, 6⟩
⟨1, 5⟩ ⟨0, 0⟩
⟨1, 2⟩ ⟨1, 3⟩
⟨0, 0⟩
⟨0, 0⟩
⟨1, 1⟩⟨1, 1⟩
Figure11:Exampleof ⟨chit,conﬁdence⟩values.Darkerboxes
indicate transactions with higher conﬁdence values. At most
one transaction in each shaded region will be accepted.
the progeny as follows:
du(T ) = ∑
T′∈Tu,T ∗←T′
cuT′
where cuT′ stands for the chit value ofT′ for nodeu. Each
transaction initially has a chit value of0 before the node
gets the query results. If the node collects a threshold ofα
yes-votes after the query, the valuecuT′ is set to 1, otherwise
remains 0 forever. Therefore, a chit value reﬂects the result
from the one-time query of its associated transaction and
becomes immutable afterwards, whiled(T ) can increase as
theDAGgrowsbycollectingmorechitsinitsprogeny.Because
cT∈{ 0, 1}, conﬁdence values are monotonic.
In addition, nodeu maintains its own local list of known
nodes Nu⊆ N that comprise the system. For simplicity, we
assume for nowNu = N, and elide subscriptu in contexts
without ambiguity.
Each node implements an event-driven state machine, cen-
tered around a query that serves both to solicit votes on each
transactionandtonotifyothernodesoftheexistenceofnewly
discovered transactions. In particular, when nodeu discovers
a transaction T through a query, it starts a one-time query
process by samplingk random peers and sending a message
to them, afterT is delivered viaonReceiveTx.
Node u answers a query by checking whether eachT′
such that T′ ∗← T is currently preferred among competing
transactions∀T′′∈ PT′. If every single ancestorT′ fulﬁlls
this criterion, the transaction is said to bestrongly preferred,
and receives a yes-vote (1). A failure of this criterion at any
T′ yields a no-vote (0). Whenu accumulates k responses, it
checks whether there areα yes-votes forT, and if so grants
the chit (chit valuecT := 1) forT. The above process will
yield a labeling of the DAG with a chit value and associated
conﬁdence for each transactionT.
Figure 11 illustrates a sample DAG built by Avalanche.
Similar to Snowball, sampling in Avalanche will create a
positive feedback for the preference of a single transaction in
its conﬂict set. For example, becauseT2 has larger conﬁdence
8
=== PAGE 9 ===
than T3, its descendants are more likely collect chits in the
future compared toT3.
SimilartoBitcoin,Avalancheleavesdeterminingtheaccep-
tance point of a transaction to the application. An application
supplies anisAcceptedpredicate that can take into account
thevalueatriskinthetransactionandthechancesofadecision
being reverted to determine when to decide.
Committing a transaction can be performed through asafe
early commitment. For virtuous transactions,T is accepted
when it is the only transaction in its conﬂict set and has a
conﬁdence not less than thresholdβ1. As in Snowball,T can
also be accepted after aβ2 number of consecutive successful
queries. If a virtuous transaction fails to get accepted due to
a problem with parents, it could be accepted if reissued with
diﬀerent parents. Figure 8 shows how Avalanche entangles
transactions. Because transactions that consume and generate
thesameUTXOdonotconﬂictwitheachother,anytransaction
can be reissued with diﬀerent parents.
Figure9illustratestheprotocolmainloopexecutedbyeach
node.Ineachiteration,thenodeattemptstoselectatransaction
T that has not yet been queried. If no such transaction exists,
the loop will stall until a new transaction is added toT . It
then selectsk peers and queries those peers. If more thanα
of those peers return a positive response, the chit value is set
to 1. After that, it updates the preferred transaction of each
conﬂictsetofthetransactionsinitsancestry.Next, T isadded
to the setQ so it will never be queried again by the node. The
code that selects additional peers if some of thek peers are
unresponsive is omitted for simplicity.
Figure 10 shows what happens when a node receives a
query for transactionT from peer j. First it addsT to T ,
unless it already has it. Then it determines ifT is currently
strongly preferred. If so, the node returns a positive response
to peer j. Otherwise, it returns a negative response. Notice
that in the pseudocode, we assume when a node knowsT,
it also recursively knows the entire ancestry ofT. This can
be achieved by postponing the delivery ofT until its entire
ancestryisrecursivelyfetched.Inpractice,anadditionalgossip
process that disseminates transactions is used in parallel, but
is not shown in pseudocode for simplicity.
5.3 Multi-Input UTXO Transactions
In addition to the DAG structure in Avalanche, anunspent
transaction output(UTXO) [45] graph that captures spending
dependency is used to realize the ledger for the payment
system. To avoid ambiguity, we denote the transactions that
encodethedataformoneytransfer transactions,whilewecall
the transactions (T∈ T ) in Avalanche’s DAGvertices.
We inherit the transaction and address mechanisms from
Bitcoin. At their simplest, transactions consist of multiple
inputs and outputs, with corresponding redeem scripts. Ad-
dresses are identiﬁed by the hash of their public keys, and
signatures are generated by corresponding private keys. The
fullscriptinglanguageisusedtoensurethataredeemscriptis
TXg
TXa TXb
TXc
Ina1 Ina2 Inb1 Inb2
Inc1 Inc2
Figure 12: The underlying logical DAG structure used by
Avalanche. The tiny squares with shades are dummy vertices
which just help form the DAG topology for the purpose of
clarity,andcan be replacedbydirectedges. The roundedgray
regions are the conﬂict sets.
authenticated to spend a UTXO. UTXOs are fully consumed
by a valid transaction, and may generate new UTXOs spend-
able by named recipients. Multi-input transactions consume
multiple UTXOs, and in Avalanche, may appear in multiple
conﬂict sets. To account for these correctly, we represent
transaction-inputpairs (e.g.Ina1) as Avalanche vertices. The
conﬂictrelationoftransaction-inputpairsistransitivebecause
of each pair only spends one unspent output. Then, we use
the conjunction ofisAcceptedfor all inputs of a transaction
to ensure that no transaction will be accepted unless all its
inputs are accepted (Figure 12). In other words, a transaction
is accepted only if all its transaction-input pairs are accepted
in their respective Snowball conﬂict sets. Following this idea,
we ﬁnally implement the DAG of transaction-input pairs such
that multiple transactions can be batched together per query.
Optimizations We implement some optimizations to help
the system scale. First, we uselazy updates to the DAG,
because the recursive deﬁnition forconﬁdence may otherwise
require a costly DAG traversal. We maintain the currentd(T )
value for each active vertex on the DAG, and update it only
when a descendant vertex gets a chit. Since the search path
can be pruned at accepted vertices, the cost for an update
is constant if the rejected vertices have a limited number
of descendants and the undecided region of the DAG stays
at constant size. Second, the conﬂict set could be large in
practice, because a rogue client can generate a large volume
of conﬂicting transactions. Instead of keeping a container
data structure for each conﬂict set, we create a mapping from
each UTXO to the preferred transaction that stands as the
representative for the entire conﬂict set. This enables a node
to quickly determine future conﬂicts, and the appropriate
responsetoqueries. Finally,wespeedupthequeryprocessby
terminating early as soon as theα threshold is met, without
waiting fork responses.
DAG Compared to Snowball, Avalanche introduces a DAG
structurethatentanglesthefateofunrelatedconﬂictsets,each
of which is a single-decree instance. This entanglement em-
bodiesatension:attachingavirtuoustransactiontoundecided
9
=== PAGE 10 ===
parents helps propel transactions towards a decision, while it
puts transactions at risk of suﬀering liveness failures when
parents turn out to be rogue. We can resolve this tension and
provide a liveness guarantee with the aid of two mechanisms.
First we adopt an adaptive parent selection strategy, where
transactions are attached at the live edge of the DAG, and are
retried with new parents closer to the genesis vertex. This
procedureisguaranteedtoterminatewithuncontested,decided
parents, ensuring that a transaction cannot suﬀer liveness
failure due to contested, rogue transactions. A secondary
mechanism ensures that virtuous transactions with decided
ancestry will receive suﬃcient chits. Correct nodes examine
the DAG for virtuous transactions that lack suﬃcient progeny
and emit no-op transactions to help increase their conﬁdence.
With these two mechanisms in place, it is easy to see that, at
worst, Avalanche will degenerate into separate instances of
Snowball, and thus provide the same liveness guarantee for
virtuous transactions.
Unlike other cryptocurrencies [50] that use graph vertices
directly as votes, Avalanche only uses a DAG for the purpose
of batching queries in the underlying Snowball instances.
Because conﬁdence is built by collected chits, and not by just
the presence of a vertex, simply ﬂooding the network with
vertices attached to the rejected side of a subgraph will not
subvert the protocol.
5.4 Communication Complexity
LettheDAGinducedbyAvalanchehaveanexpectedbranching
factor ofp, corresponding to the width of the DAG, and deter-
mined by the parent selection algorithm. Given theβ1 and β2
decisionthreshold,atransactionthathasjustreachedthepoint
of decision will have an associated progenyY. Letmbe the
expected depth ofY. If we were to let the Avalanche network
makeprogressandthenfreezetheDAGatadepth y,thenitwill
have roughlypyvertices/transactions, of whichp(y− m)are
decidedinexpectation.Only pmrecenttransactionswouldlack
theprogenyrequiredforadecision.Foreachnode,eachquery
requires k samples, and therefore the total message cost per
transaction is in expectation(pky)/(p(y− m)) = ky/(y− m).
Since mis a constant determined by the undecided region of
the DAG as the system constantly makes progress, message
complexity per node isO(k), while the total complexity is
O(kn).
6 Evaluation
6.1 Setup
We conduct our experiments on Amazon EC2 by running
from hundreds (125) to thousands (2000) of virtual machine
instances. We usec5.large instances, each of which simu-
lates an individual node. AWS provides bandwidth of up to 2
Gbps, though the Avalanche protocol utilizes at most around
100 Mbps.
Our implementation supports two versions of transactions:
one is the customized UTXO format, while the other uses the
code directly from Bitcoin 0.16. Both supported formats use
secp256k1 crypto library from bitcoin and provide the same
addressformatforwallets.Allexperimentsusethecustomized
format except for the geo-replication, where results for both
are given.
Wesimulateaconstantﬂowofnewtransactionsfrom users
bycreatingseparateclientprocesses,eachofwhichmaintains
separated wallets, generates transactions with new recipient
addresses and sends the requests to Avalanche nodes. We use
several such client processes to max out the capacity of our
system.Thenumberofrecipientsforeachtransactionistuned
to achieve average transaction sizes of around 250 bytes (1–2
inputs/outputs per transaction on average and a stable UTXO
size),thecurrentaveragetransactionsizeofBitcoin.Toutilize
thenetworkeﬃciently,webatchupto40transactionsduringa
query,butmaintainconﬁdencevaluesatindividualtransaction
granularity.
Allreportedmetricsreﬂectend-to-endmeasurementstaken
from the perspective of all clients. That is, clients examine
the total number of conﬁrmed transactions per second for
throughput, and, for each transaction, subtract the initiation
timestamp from the conﬁrmation timestamp for latency. Each
throughput experiment is repeated for 5 times and standard
deviationisindicatedineachﬁgure.Asforsecurityparameters,
we pickk = 10, α = 0.8, β1 = 11, β2 = 150, which yields an
MTTF of ~1024 years.
6.2 Throughput
We ﬁrst measure the throughput of the system by saturating it
withtransactionsandexaminingtherateatwhichtransactions
are conﬁrmed in the steady state. For this experiment, we ﬁrst
run Avalanche on 125 nodes with 10 client processes, each
of which maintains 400 outstanding transactions at any given
time.
AsshownbytheﬁrstgroupofbarsinFigure13,thesystem
achieves 6851 transactions per second (tps) for a batch size of
20 and above 7002 tps for a batch size of 40. Our system is
saturatedbyasmallbatchsizecomparingtootherblockchains
with known performance: Bitcoin batches several thousands
of transactions per block, Algorand [30] uses 2–10 Mbyte
blocks,i.e.,8.4–41.9Ktx/batchandConﬂux[40]uses4Mbyte
blocks, i.e., 16.8K tx/batch. These systems are relatively slow
in making a single decision, and thus require a very large
batch (block) size for better performance. Achieving high
throughput with small batch size implies low latency, as we
will show later.
6.3 Scalability
To examine how the system scales in terms of the number of
nodes participating in Avalanche consensus, we run experi-
ments with identical settings and vary the number of nodes
from 125 up to 2000.
Figure 13 shows that overall throughput degrades about
1.34%to6909tpswhenthenetworkgrowsbyafactorof16to
10
=== PAGE 11 ===
125 250 500 1000 2000
Number of Nodes
0
2000
4000
6000
8000Throughput (tps.)
6.9K 6.7K 6.8K 6.9K 6.5K
7.0K 7.1K 7.2K 7.4K
6.9K
Figure 13: Throughput vs. network size. Each pair of bars is
produced with batch size of 20 and 40, from left to right.
125 250 500 1000 2000
Number of Nodes
0
5000
10000
15000
20000Throughput (tps.)
7.0K 7.1K 7.2K 7.4K 6.9K
18.1K 19.1K 18.8K 19.2K 19.5K
Figure 14: Throughput for batch size of 40, with (left) and
without (right) signature veriﬁcation.
n = 2000. This degradation is minor compared to the growth
of the network size. Note that the x-axis is logarithmic.
Avalanche acquires its scalability from three sources: ﬁrst,
maintaining a partial order that captures only the spending
relations allows for more concurrency than a classical BFT
replicated log that linearizes all transactions; second, the lack
of a leader naturally avoids bottlenecks; ﬁnally,the number of
messages each node has to handle per decision isO(k) and
does not grow as the network scales up.
6.4 Cryptography Bottleneck
We next examine where bottlenecks lie in our current im-
plementation. The purple bar on the right of each group in
Figure 14 shows the throughput of Avalanche with signature
veriﬁcation disabled. Throughputs get approximately 2.6x
higher, compared to the blue bar on the left. This reveals that
cryptographic veriﬁcation overhead is the current bottleneck
of our system implementation. This bottleneck can be ad-
dressed by oﬄoading transaction veriﬁcation to a GPU. Even
without such optimization, 7K tps is far in excess of extant
blockchains.
6.5 Latency
Thelatencyofatransactionisthetimespentfromthemoment
of its submission until it is conﬁrmed as accepted. Figure 15
tallies the latency distribution histogram using the same setup
as for the throughput measurements with 2000 nodes. The
x-axis is the time in seconds while the y-axis is the portion of
0.01 0.050.1
0.2060.426
1 2
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.01 0.050.1
0.2060.426
1 2
0.0
0.5
1.0hist. cdf.
Time (sec.)
Figure 15: Transaction latency distribution forn = 2000.
The x-axis is the transaction latency in log-scaled seconds,
while the y-axis is the portion of transactions that fall into
the conﬁrmation time (normalized to1). Histogram of all
transaction latencies for a client is shown on the left with100
bins, while its CDF is on the right.
transactions that are ﬁnalized within the corresponding time
period. This ﬁgure also outlines the Cumulative Distribution
Function (CDF) by accumulating the number of ﬁnalized
transactions over time.
Thisexperimentshowsthatmosttransactionsareconﬁrmed
withinapproximately0.3seconds.Themostcommonlatencies
are around 206 ms and variance is low, indicating that nodes
converge on the ﬁnal value as a group around the same time.
The second vertical line shows the maximum latency we
observe, which is around 0.4 seconds.
Figure 16 shows transaction latencies for diﬀerent numbers
of nodes. The horizontal edges of boxes represent minimum,
ﬁrst quartile, median, third quartile and maximum latency
respectively, from bottom to top. Crucially, the experimental
data show that median latency is more-or-less independent of
network size.
6.6 Misbehaving Clients
We next examine how rogue transactions issued by misbe-
having clients that double spend unspent outputs can aﬀect
latency for virtuous transactions created by honest clients.
We adopt a strategy to simulate misbehaving clients where a
fraction(from 0%to 25%)ofthependingtransactionsconﬂict
with some existing ones. The client processes achieve this by
designating some double spending transaction ﬂows among
allsimulatedpendingtransactionsandsending theconﬂicting
transactions to diﬀerent nodes. We use the same setup with
n = 1000 as in the previous experiments, and only measure
throughput and latency of conﬁrmed transactions.
Avalanche’slatencyisonlyslightlyaﬀectedbymisbehaving
clients, as shown in Figure 17. Surprisingly, maximum laten-
cies drop slightly when the percentage of rogue transactions
increases. This behavior occurs because, with the introduc-
tion of rogue transactions, the overalleﬀectivethroughput is
reduced and thus alleviates system load. This is conﬁrmed by
Figure 18, which shows that throughput (of virtuous transac-
tions) decreases with the ratio of rogue transactions. Further,
11
=== PAGE 12 ===
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Time (sec.)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
 b20-dsa
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
 b40-dsa
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
 b20-raw
125 250 500 1000 2000
Number of Nodes
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
 b40-raw
Figure 16: Transaction latency vs. network size. “b” indicates
batch size and “raw” is the run without signature veriﬁcation.
0.0
0.5
1.0
Time (sec.)
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25%
Rogue Transactions in Percentage
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
 b40-byz
Figure 17: Latency vs. ratio of rogue transactions.
thereductioninthroughputappearsproportionaltothenumber
of misbehaving clients, that is, there is no leverage provided
to the attackers.
6.7 Geo-replication
Next experiment shows the system in an emulated geo-
replicated scenario, patterned after the same scenario in prior
work [30]. We selected 20 major cities that appear to be near
substantial numbers of reachable Bitcoin nodes, according
to [10]. The cities cover North America, Europe, West Asia,
East Asia, Oceania, and also cover the top 10 countries with
thehighestnumberofreachablenodes.Weusethelatencyand
jitter matrix crawled from [60] and emulate network packet
latency in the Linux kernel usingtc and netem. 2000 nodes
are distributed evenly to each city, with no additional network
latency emulated between nodes within the same city. Like
Algorand’sevaluation,wealsocapourbandwidthperprocess
to 20 Mbps to simulate internet-scale settings where there are
many commodity networklinks. We assign a clientprocess to
eachcity,maintaining 400 outstanding transactions percityat
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25%
Rogue Transactions in Percentage
0
2000
4000
6000
8000Throughput (tps.)
7.4K 7.1K
6.7K 6.6K 6.5K 6.5K
Figure 18: Throughput vs. ratio of rogue transactions.
0.5
1.351 4.246
10
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.5
1.351 4.246
10
0.0
0.5
1.0hist. cdf.
Time (sec.)
Figure 19: Latency histogram/CDF forn = 2000 in 20 cities.
any moment.
In this scenario, Avalanche achieves an average throughput
of 3401 tps, with a standard deviation of 39 tps. As shown in
Figure19,themediantransactionlatencyis1.35seconds,with
a maximum latency of 4.25 seconds. We also support native
Bitcoin code for transactions; in this case, the throughput is
3530 tps, withσ = 92tps.
6.8 Comparison to Other Systems
Thoughthereareseeminglyabundantblockchainorcryptocur-
rency protocols, most of them only present a sketch of their
protocols and do not oﬀer practical implementation or evalua-
tion results. Moreover, among those who do provide results,
most are not evaluated in realistic, large-scale (hundreds to
thousands of full nodes participating in consensus) settings.
Therefore,wechooseAlgorandandConﬂuxforourcompar-
ison. Algorand,Conﬂux,andAvalancheareallfundamentally
diﬀerent in their design. Algorand’s committee-scale con-
sensus algorithm is quorum-based Byzantine agreement, and
Conﬂux extends Nakamoto consensus by a DAG structure
to facilitate higher throughput, while Avalanche belongs to a
new protocol family based on metastability. Additionally, we
use Bitcoin [45] as a baseline.
Both Algorand and Avalanche evaluations use a decision
network of size 2000 on EC2. Our evaluation picked shared
c5.large instances, while Algorand used m4.2xlarge.
These two platforms are very similar except for a slight CPU
clock speed edge forc5.large, which goes largely unused
becauseourprocessonlyconsumes 30%intheseexperiments.
The security parameters chosen in our experiments guarantee
12
=== PAGE 13 ===
a safety violation probability below10−9 in the presence of
20%Byzantinenodes,whileAlgorand’sevaluationguarantees
a violation probability below5× 10−9 with 20% Byzantine
nodes.
NeitherAlgorandnorConﬂuxevaluationstakeintoaccount
the overhead of cryptographic veriﬁcation. Their evaluations
use blocks that carry megabytes of dummy data and present
the throughput in MB/hour or GB/hour unit. So we use the
average size of a Bitcoin transaction, 250 bytes, to derive
their throughputs. In contrast, our experiments carry real
transactions and fully take all cryptographic overhead into
account.
The throughput is 3-7 tps for Bitcoin, 874 tps for Algorand
(with 10 Mbyte blocks), 3355 tps for Conﬂux (in the paper it
claims 3.84x Algorand’s throughput under the same settings).
In contrast, Avalanche achieves over 3400 tps consistently
on up to 2000 nodes without committee or proof-of-work. As
for latency, a transaction is conﬁrmed after 10–60 minutes in
Bitcoin, around 50 seconds in Algorand, 7.6–13.8 minutes in
Conﬂux, and 1.35 seconds in Avalanche.
Avalanche performs much better than Algorand in both
throughput and latency because Algorand uses a veriﬁable
random function to elect committees, and maintains a totally-
ordered log while Avalanche establishes only a partial order.
Although Algorand’s leadership is anonymous and changes
continuously, it is still leader-based which could be the bottle-
neck for scalability, while Avalanche is leader-less.
AvalanchehassimilarthroughputtoConﬂux,butitslatency
is 337–613x better. Conﬂux also uses a DAG structure to
amortize the cost for consensus and increase the throughput,
however, it is still rooted in Nakamoto consensus (PoW),
making it unable to have instant conﬁrmation compared to
Avalanche.
Inablockchainsystem,onecanusuallyimprovethroughput
at the cost of latency through batching. The real bottleneck
of the performance is the number of decisions the system
can make per second, and this is fundamentally limited by
eitherByzantineAgreement( BA∗)inAlgorandandNakamoto
consensus in Conﬂux.
7 Related Work
Bitcoin [45] is a cryptocurrency that uses a blockchain based
on proof-of-work (PoW) to maintain a ledger of UTXO trans-
actions. While techniques based on proof-of-work [5,26],
and even cryptocurrencies with minting based on proof-of-
work [51,59], have been explored before, Bitcoin was the
ﬁrst to incorporate PoW into its consensus process. Unlike
more traditional BFT protocols, Bitcoin has a probabilistic
safety guarantee and assumes honest majority computational
power rather than a known membership, which in turn has
enabled an internet-scale permissionless protocol. While per-
missionless and resilient to adversaries, Bitcoin suﬀers from
low throughput (~3 tps) and high latency (~5.6 hours for
a network with 20% Byzantine presence and2−32 security
guarantee). Furthermore, PoW requires a substantial amount
ofcomputationalpowerthatisconsumedonlyforthepurpose
of maintaining safety.
Countless cryptocurrencies use PoW [5,26] to maintain
a distributed ledger. Like Bitcoin, they suﬀer from inherent
scalability bottlenecks. Several proposals for protocols exist
that try to better utilize the eﬀort made by PoW. Bitcoin-
NG [27] and the permissionless version of Thunderella [48]
use Nakamoto-like consensus to elect a leader that dictates
writing of the replicated log for a relatively long time so as to
providehigherthroughput.Moreover,Thunderellaprovidesan
optimisticboundthat,with3/4honestcomputationalpowerand
an honest elected leader, allows transactions to be conﬁrmed
rapidly. ByzCoin [37] periodically selects a small set of
participants and then runs a PBFT-like protocol within the
selected nodes.
Protocols based on Byzantine agreement [39,49] typically
make use of quorums and require precise knowledge of mem-
bership. PBFT [15,16], a well-known representative, requires
a quadratic number of message exchanges in order to reach
agreement.TheQ/Uprotocol[2]andHQreplication[19]usea
quorum-based approach to optimize for contention-free cases
of operation to achieve consensus in only a single round of
communication. However, although these protocols improve
on performance, they degrade very poorly under contention.
Zyzzyva [38] couples BFT with speculative execution to
improve the failure-free operation case. Past work in permis-
sioned BFT systems typically requires at least3 f + 1replicas.
CheapBFT [34] leverages trusted hardware components to
construct a protocol that usesf + 1 replicas.
Other work attempts to introduce new protocols under re-
deﬁnitions and relaxations of the BFT model. Large-scale
BFT[52]modiﬁesPBFTtoallowforarbitrarychoiceofnum-
ber of replicas and failure threshold, providing a probabilistic
guarantee of liveness for some failure ratio but protecting
safety with high probability. In another form of relaxation.
Zeno[54]introducesaBFTstatemachinereplicationprotocol
that trades consistency for high availability. More speciﬁcally,
Zeno guarantees eventual consistency rather than linearizabil-
ity,meaningthatparticipantscanbeinconsistentbuteventually
agreeoncethenetworkstabilizes.Byprovidinganevenweaker
consistency guarantee, namely fork-join-causal consistency,
Depot [42] describes a protocol that guarantees safety under
2 f + 1 replicas.
NOW [31] uses sub-quorums to drive smaller instances of
consensus. The insight of this paperis that small,logarithmic-
sized quorums can be extracted from a potentially large set of
nodesinthenetwork,allowingsmallerinstancesofconsensus
protocols to be run in parallel.
SnowWhite[21]andOuroboros[36]aresomeoftheearliest
provably secure PoS protocols. Ouroboros uses a secure
multiparty coin-ﬂipping protocol to produce randomness for
leaderelection.Thefollow-upprotocol,OuroborosPraos[22]
provides safety in the presence of fully adaptive adversaries.
13
=== PAGE 14 ===
HoneyBadger [44] provides good liveness in a network with
heterogeneous latencies.
Tendermint[11,12]rotatestheleaderforeachblockandhas
been demonstrated with as many as 64 nodes. Ripple [53] has
low latency by utilizing collectively-trusted sub-networks in a
largenetwork.TheRipplecompanyprovidesaslow-changing
default list of trusted nodes, which renders the system essen-
tially centralized. HotStuﬀ [61,62] improves the communica-
tion cost from quadratic to linear and signiﬁcantly simpliﬁes
the protocol speciﬁcation, although the leader bottleneck still
persists. Facebook uses HotStuﬀ as the core consensus for
its Libra project. In the synchronous setting, inspired by Hot-
Stuﬀ, Sync HotStuﬀ [3] achieves consensus in2∆time with
quadratic cost and unlike other lock-steped synchronous pro-
tocols, it operates as fast as network propagates. Stellar [43]
uses Federated Byzantine Agreement in whichquorum slices
enable heterogeneous trust for diﬀerent nodes. Safety is guar-
anteed when transactions can be transitively connected by
trustedquorumslices.Algorand[30]usesaveriﬁablerandom
function to select a committee of nodes that participate in a
novel Byzantine consensus protocol.
Some protocols use a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG)
structure instead of a linear chain to achieve consen-
sus [6,9,55–57]. Instead of choosing the longest chain as
in Bitcoin, GHOST [56] uses a more eﬃcient chain selec-
tion rule that allows transactions not on the main chain to be
takenintoconsideration,increasingeﬃciency.SPECTRE[55]
uses transactions on the DAG to vote recursively with PoW
to achieve consensus, followed up by PHANTOM [57] that
achieves a linear order among all blocks. Like PHANTOM,
ConﬂuxalsoﬁnalizesalinearorderoftransactionsbyPoWin
a DAG structure, with better resistance to liveness attack [40].
Avalanche is diﬀerent in that the voting result is a one-time
chitthatisdeterminedbyaquerywithoutPoW,whilethevotes
in PHANTOM or Conﬂux are purely determined by PoW in
transaction structure. Similar to Thunderella, Meshcash [9]
combines a slow PoW-based protocol with a fast consensus
protocol that allows a high block rate regardless of network
latency, oﬀering fast conﬁrmation time. Hashgraph [6] is a
leader-less protocol that builds a DAG via randomized gossip.
Itrequiresfullmembershipknowledgeatalltimes,and,similar
to the Ben-Or [8], it requires exponential messages [4,14] in
expectation.
8 Conclusion
This paper introduced a novel family of consensus protocols,
coupled with the appropriate mathematical tools for analyz-
ing them. These protocols are highly eﬃcient and robust,
combiningthebestfeaturesofclassicalandNakamotoconsen-
sus.hey scale well, achieve high throughput and quick ﬁnality,
work without precise membership knowledge, and degrade
gracefully under catastrophic adversarial attacks.
There is much work to do to improve this line of research.
One such improvement could be the introduction of an adver-
sarial network scheduler. Another improvement would be to
characterizethesystem’sguaranteesunderanadversarywhose
powersarerealisticallylimited,whereuponperformancewould
improve even further. Finally, more sophisticated initializa-
tion mechanisms would bear fruitful in improving liveness of
multi-value consensus. Overall, we hope that the protocols
and analysis techniques presented here add to the arsenal of
the distributed system developers and provide a foundation
for new lightweight and scalable mechanisms.
References
[1] Crypto-currency market capitalizations. https://
coinmarketcap.com. Accessed: 2017-02.
[2] Abd-El-Malek, M., Ganger, G. R., Goodson, G. R.,
Reiter, M. K., and Wylie, J. J.Fault-scalablebyzantine
fault-tolerant services. In ACM SIGOPS Operating
Systems Review(2005), vol. 39, ACM, pp. 59–74.
[3] Abraham, I., Malkhi, D., Nayak, K., Ren, L., and Yin,
M. Sync hotstuﬀ: Simple and practical synchronous
state machine replication. Cryptology ePrint Archive,
Report2019/270,2019. https://eprint.iacr.org/
2019/270.
[4] Aspnes, J. Randomized protocols for asynchronous
consensus. Distributed Computing 16, 2-3 (2003), 165–
175.
[5] Aspnes, J., Jackson, C., and Krishnamurthy , A.Ex-
posing computationally-challenged byzantine impostors.
Tech. rep., Technical Report YALEU/DCS/TR-1332,
Yale University Department of Computer Science, 2005.
[6] Baird, L. Hashgraph consensus: fair, fast, byzantine
fault tolerance. Tech. rep., Swirlds Tech Report, 2016.
[7] Banerjee, S., Chatterjee, A., and Shakkottai, S.Epi-
demic thresholds with external agents. InIEEE INFO-
COM 2014-IEEE Conference on Computer Communi-
cations (2014), IEEE, pp. 2202–2210.
[8] Ben-Or, M. Anotheradvantageoffreechoice(extended
abstract): Completely asynchronous agreement proto-
cols. In Proceedings of the second annual ACM sym-
posium on Principles of distributed computing(1983),
ACM, pp. 27–30.
[9] Bentov , I., Hub/aacute.sccek, P ., Moran, T., and Nadler, A.
Tortoise and Hares Consensus: the Meshcash frame-
workforincentive-compatible,scalablecryptocurrencies.
IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive 2017(2017), 300.
[10] Bitnodes. Global Bitcoin nodes distribution.https:
//bitnodes.earn.com/. Accessed: 2018-04.
[11] Buchman, E. Tendermint: Byzantine fault tolerance in
the age of blockchains. PhD thesis, 2016.
14
=== PAGE 15 ===
[12] Buchman, E., Kwon, J., and Milosevic, Z. The latest
gossip on bft consensus, 2018.
[13] Burrows, M. The chubby lock service for loosely-
coupled distributed systems. In7th Symposium on Op-
erating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI’06),
November 6-8, Seattle, WA, USA(2006), pp. 335–350.
[14] Cachin, C., and Vukolic, M. Blockchain consensus
protocols in the wild.CoRR abs/1707.01873(2017).
[15] Castro, M., and Liskov , B.Practical byzantine fault
tolerance. InProceedings of the Third USENIX Sympo-
sium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation
(OSDI), New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, February 22-25,
1999 (1999), pp. 173–186.
[16] Castro, M., and Liskov , B.Practical byzantine fault
tolerance and proactive recovery.ACM Trans. Comput.
Syst. 20, 4 (2002), 398–461.
[17] Central Intelligence Agency. The world factbook.
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/
the-world-factbook/geos/da.html. Accessed:
2018-04.
[18] Chv/aacute.sctal, V .Thetailofthehypergeometricdistribution.
Discrete Mathematics 25, 3 (1979), 285–287.
[19] Cowling, J., Myers, D., Liskov , B., Rodrigues, R., and
Shrira, L.Hqreplication:Ahybridquorumprotocolfor
byzantinefaulttolerance. In Proceedingsofthe7thsym-
posiumonOperatingsystemsdesignandimplementation
(2006), USENIX Association, pp. 177–190.
[20] Croman, K., Decker, C., Eyal, I., Gencer, A. E., Juels,
A., Kosba, A. E., Miller, A., Saxena, P ., Shi, E., Sirer,
E. G., Song, D., and Wattenhofer, R. On scaling
decentralizedblockchains-(aposition paper). In Finan-
cial Cryptography and Data Security - FC 2016 Inter-
national Workshops, BITCOIN, VOTING, and WAHC,
Christ Church, Barbados, February 26, 2016, Revised
Selected Papers(2016), pp. 106–125.
[21] Daian, P ., Pass, R., and Shi, E.Snow white: Provably
secureproofsofstake.CryptologyePrintArchive,Report
2016/919, 2016. https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/
919.
[22] David, B., Gazi, P ., Kiayias, A., and Russell,
A. Ouroboros Praos: An adaptively-secure, semi-
synchronous proof-of-stake blockchain. InAdvances in
Cryptology - EUROCRYPT 2018 - 37th Annual Inter-
national Conference on the Theory and Applications of
Cryptographic Techniques, Tel Aviv, Israel, April 29 -
May 3, 2018 Proceedings, Part II(2018), pp. 66–98.
[23] Digiconomist. Bitcoin energy consump-
tion index. https://digiconomist.net/
bitcoin-energy-consumption. Accessed: 2018-04.
[24] Douceur, J. R. The sybil attack. In International
Workshop on Peer-to-Peer Systems(2002), Springer,
pp. 251–260.
[25] Draief, M., Ganesh, A., and Massouli/eacute.sc, L.Thresholds
for virus spread on networks. InProceedings of the 1st
international conference on Performance evaluation
methodologies and tools(2006), ACM, p. 51.
[26] Dwork, C., and Naor, M. Pricing via processing or
combatting junk mail. In Advances in Cryptology -
CRYPTO ’92, 12th Annual International Cryptology
Conference, Santa Barbara, California, USA, August
16-20, 1992, Proceedings(1992), pp. 139–147.
[27] Eyal, I., Gencer, A. E., Sirer, E. G., and van Renesse,
R. Bitcoin-NG: A scalable blockchain protocol. In
13thUSENIX Symposium on NetworkedSystems Design
andImplementation,NSDI2016,SantaClara,CA,USA,
March 16-18, 2016(2016), pp. 45–59.
[28] Ganesh, A., Massouli/eacute.sc, L., and Towsley, D.The
eﬀect of network topology on the spread of epidemics.
In Proceedings IEEE 24th Annual Joint Conference
of the IEEE Computer and Communications Societies.
(2005), vol. 2, IEEE, pp. 1455–1466.
[29] Garay, J. A., Kiayias, A., and Leonardos, N. The
Bitcoin Backbone Protocol: Analysis and applications.
In Advances in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT 2015 - 34th
Annual International Conference on the Theory and
Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, Soﬁa, Bul-
garia, April 26-30, 2015, Proceedings, Part II(2015),
pp. 281–310.
[30] Gilad, Y ., Hemo, R., Micali, S., Vlachos, G., and
Zeldovich, N. Algorand:Scalingbyzantineagreements
for cryptocurrencies. InProceedings of the 26th Sympo-
siumonOperatingSystemsPrinciples,Shanghai,China,
October 28-31, 2017(2017), pp. 51–68.
[31] Guerraoui, R., Huc, F., and Kermarrec, A.-M.Highly
dynamic distributed computing with byzantine failures.
In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM symposium on Princi-
plesofdistributedcomputing (2013),ACM,pp.176–183.
[32] Hoeffding, W. Probability inequalities for sums of
bounded random variables.Journal of the American
statistical association 58, 301 (1963), 13–30.
[33] Hunt, P ., Konar, M., Junqueira, F. P ., and Reed, B.
Zookeeper: Wait-free coordination for internet-scale
systems. In2010USENIXAnnualTechnicalConference,
Boston, MA, USA, June 23-25, 2010(2010).
15
=== PAGE 16 ===
[34] Kapitza, R., Behl, J., Cachin, C., Distler, T., Kuhnle,
S., Mohammadi, S. V ., Schr/odieresis.scder-Preikschat, W ., and
Stengel, K. Cheapbft:resource-eﬃcientbyzantinefault
tolerance. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM european
conferenceonComputerSystems (2012),ACM,pp.295–
308.
[35] Keeling, M. J., and Rohani, P . Modeling infectious
diseases in humans and animals. Princeton University
Press, 2011.
[36] Kiayias, A., Russell, A., David, B., and Oliynykov , R.
Ouroboros:Aprovablysecureproof-of-stakeblockchain
protocol. InAdvances in Cryptology - CRYPTO 2017 -
37thAnnualInternationalCryptologyConference,Santa
Barbara, CA, USA, August 20-24, 2017, Proceedings,
Part I(2017), pp. 357–388.
[37] Kokoris-Kogias, E., Jovanovic, P ., Gailly , N., Khoffi,
I., Gasser, L., and Ford, B.EnhancingBitcoinsecurity
and performance with strong consistency via collective
signing. In25th USENIX Security Symposium, USENIX
Security16,Austin,TX,USA,August10-12,2016. (2016),
pp. 279–296.
[38] Kotla, R., Alvisi, L., Dahlin, M., Clement, A., and
Wong, E. L. Zyzzyva: Speculative byzantine fault toler-
ance. ACM Trans. Comput. Syst. 27, 4 (2009), 7:1–7:39.
[39] Lamport, L., Shostak, R. E., and Pease, M. C. The
byzantinegeneralsproblem. ACMTrans.Program.Lang.
Syst. 4, 3 (1982), 382–401.
[40] Li, C., Li, P ., Xu, W ., Long, F., and Yao, A. C.Scaling
nakamoto consensus to thousands of transactions per
second. CoRR abs/1805.03870(2018).
[41] Liggett, T. M., et al. Stochastic models of interacting
systems. The Annals of Probability 25, 1 (1997), 1–29.
[42] Mahajan, P ., Setty, S., Lee, S., Clement, A., Alvisi,
L., Dahlin, M., and W alfish, M.Depot:Cloudstorage
with minimal trust.ACM Transactions on Computer
Systems (TOCS) 29, 4 (2011), 12.
[43] Mazieres, D. The Stellar consensus protocol: A feder-
ated model for internet-level consensus.Stellar Devel-
opment Foundation(2015).
[44] Miller, A., Xia, Y ., Croman, K., Shi, E., and Song, D.
The Honey Badger of BFT protocols. InProceedings
of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
andCommunicationsSecurity,Vienna,Austria,October
24-28, 2016(2016), pp. 31–42.
[45] Nakamoto, S. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash
system, 2008.
[46] Pass, R., Seeman, L., and Shelat, A. Analysis of
the blockchain protocol in asynchronous networks. In
Advances in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT 2017 - 36th
Annual International Conference on the Theory and
ApplicationsofCryptographicTechniques,Paris,France,
April 30 - May 4, 2017, Proceedings, Part II(2017),
pp. 643–673.
[47] Pass, R., and Shi, E. Fruitchains: A fair blockchain.
IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive 2016(2016), 916.
[48] Pass, R., and Shi, E. Thunderella: Blockchains with
optimistic instant conﬁrmation. InAdvances in Cryptol-
ogy - EUROCRYPT 2018 - 37th Annual International
Conference on the Theory and Applications of Crypto-
graphic Techniques, Tel Aviv, Israel, April 29 - May 3,
2018 Proceedings, Part II(2018), pp. 3–33.
[49] Pease, M. C., Shostak, R. E., and Lamport, L. Reach-
ing agreement in the presence of faults.J. ACM 27, 2
(1980), 228–234.
[50] Popov , S. The tangle. https://www.iota.org/
research/academic-papers. Accessed: 2018-04.
[51] Rivest, R., and Shamir, A. Payword and micromint:
Two simple micropayment schemes. InSecurity proto-
cols (1997), Springer, pp. 69–87.
[52] Rodrigues, R., Kouznetsov , P ., and Bhattacharjee,
B. Large-scale byzantine fault tolerance: Safe but not
always live. InProceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Hot
Topics in System Dependability(2007).
[53] Schwartz, D., Youngs, N., Britto, A., et al. The
Ripple protocol consensus algorithm.Ripple Labs Inc
White Paper 5(2014).
[54] Singh, A., Fonseca, P ., Kuznetsov , P ., Rodrigues, R.,
and Maniatis, P .Zeno:Eventuallyconsistentbyzantine-
fault tolerance. In Proceedings of the 6th USENIX
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Imple-
mentation, NSDI 2009, April 22-24, 2009, Boston, MA,
USA(2009), pp. 169–184.
[55] Sompolinsky , Y ., Lewenberg, Y ., and Zohar, A.SPEC-
TRE:Afastandscalablecryptocurrencyprotocol. IACR
Cryptology ePrint Archive 2016(2016), 1159.
[56] Sompolinsky, Y ., and Zohar, A. Secure high-rate
transaction processing in Bitcoin. InFinancial Cryp-
tography and Data Security, San Juan, Puerto Rico,
January 26-30, 2015, Revised Selected Papers(2015),
pp. 507–527.
[57] Sompolinsky , Y ., and Zohar, A.PHANTOM: A scal-
ableblockdagprotocol. IACRCryptologyePrintArchive
2018 (2018), 104.
16
=== PAGE 17 ===
[58] Tan, W. On the absorption probabilities and absorp-
tion times of ﬁnite homogeneous birth-death processes.
Biometrics(1976), 745–752.
[59] Vishnumurthy, V ., Chandrakumar, S., and Sirer,
E. G. Karma: A secure economic framework for peer-
to-peer resource sharing. InWorkshop on Economics of
Peer-to-peer Systems(2003), vol. 35.
[60] WonderNetwork. Global ping statistics: Ping
times between wondernetwork servers. https://
wondernetwork.com/pings. Accessed: 2018-04.
[61] Yin, M., Malkhi, D., Reiter, M. K., Gueta, G. G., and
Abraham, I. Hotstuﬀ: Bft consensus in the lens of
blockchain, 2018.
[62] Yin, M., Malkhi, D., Reiter, M. K., Gueta, G. G.,
and Abraham, I. Hotstuﬀ: Bftconsensus withlinearity
and responsiveness. InProceedings of the 2019 ACM
Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing
(NewYork,NY,USA,2019),PODC’19,ACM,pp.347–
356.
A Analysis
In this appendix, we provide an analysis of Slush, Snowﬂake
and Snowball.
A.1 Preliminaries
We assume the network model as discussed in Section 2. We
let R(“red”) andB(“blue”) represent two generic conﬂicting
choices. Without loss of generality, we focus our attention on
counts ofB, i.e. the total number of nodes that prefer blue.
Hypergeometric Distribution Each network query ofk
peers corresponds to a sample without replacement out of
a network ofn nodes, also referred to as a hypergeometric
sample. We let the random variableH (N , x, k)→{ 0, . . . ,k}
denotetheresultingcountsof Binthesample(unlessotherwise
stated), wherex is the total count ofB in the population. The
probability that the query achieves the required threshold of
αor more votes is given by:
P(H (N , x, k)≥ α) =
k
∑
j=α
(x
j
)(n− x
k− j
)/(n
k
)
(2)
Foreaseofnotation,weoverload H (∗)byimplicitlyreferring
to P(H (N , x, k)≥ α)as H (N , x, k, α).
Tail Bounds On Hypergeometric Distribution We can
reduce some ofthe complexity in Equation 2 by introducing a
bound on the hypergeometric distribution induced byH k
N ,x.
Let p = x/nbetheratioofsupportfor Binthepopulation.The
expectation ofH (N , x, k)is exactlykp. Then, the probability
that H (N , x, k)willdeviatefromthemeanbymorethansome
small constantψis given by the Hoeﬀding tail bound [32], as
follows,
P(H (C , x, k)≤ (p− ψ)k)≤ e−kD(p−ψ,p)
≤ e−2(p−ψ)2k (3)
where D(p− ψ, p)is the Kullback-Leibler divergence, mea-
sured as
D(a, b) = a log a
b + (1− a) log 1− a
1− b (4)
ConcentrationofSub-Martingales Let{X{t≥0}}beasub-
martingale and|Xt− Xt−1| < ct almost surely. Then, for all
positive realsψ and all positive integerst,
P(Xt≥ X0 + ψ)≤ e−ψ2/2 ∑t
i=1 c2t (5)
A.2 Slush
Slushoperatesinanon-Byzantinesetting;thatis, f = 0, c = n.
In this section, we will characterize the irreversibility proper-
ties of Slush (which appear in Snowﬂake and Snowball), as
well as the precise converge rate distribution. The distribution
of of both safety and liveness of Slush translate well to the
Byzantine setting.
The procedural version of Slush in Figure 4 made use of
a parameter m, the number of rounds that a node executes
Slush queries. What we ultimately want to extract is the total
number of roundsφ that the scheduler will need to execute in
order to guarantee that the entire network is the same color,
whp.
We analyze the system mainly using a continuous time
process. Let{X{t≥0}} be a CTMC. The state spaceS of
the stochastic process is a condensed version of the full
conﬁguration space, where each state{0, . . . ,n} represents
the total number of blue nodes in the system.
Let FXs be the ﬁltration, or the history pertaining to the
process, up to times. This process is Markovian and time-
homogeneous, conforming to
P{Xt = j|FXs} = P{Xt = j|Xs} = P{Xt = j|X0}
Throughout the paper, we useQ≡ (qi j, i, j∈ S ) notation
to refer to the inﬁnitesimal generator of the process, where
death (i→ i− 1) and birth (i→ i + 1) rates of conﬁguration
transitions are denoted viaµi and λi (λi is distinct from the
clockparameter λ,andwillbeclearfromcontext).Theserates
are {
µi = i H (N , c− i, k, α), for i→ i− 1
λi = (c− i) H (N , i, k, α), for j→ i + 1
for 1≤ i≤ c− 1,andwhere i = 0and i = careabsorbing.Let
pi j(t) refer to the probability of transitioning from statei to j
17
=== PAGE 18 ===
at timet. We always assume that
pi j(t) =



λit + o(t), for j = i + 1
µit + o(t), for j = i− 1
1− (λi + µi)t + o(t), for j = i
o(t), otherwise
where allo(t)are uniform ini.
Irreversibility InSection4,wediscussedthelooseChvatal
bound which provided intuitive understanding into the strong
irreversibility dynamics of our core subsampling mechanism.
Inparticular,oncethenetworkdriftstosomemajorityvalue,it
tendstorevertbackwithonlyanexponentiallysmallprobabil-
ity. We compute the closed-form expression for reversibility,
and show that it is exponentially small.
Theorem 2.Let ξδ be the probability of absorption into the
all-red state (s0), starting from a drift ofδ (i.e. δ drift away
from n/2). Then, assumingδ > 1,
ξδ = 1−
δ
∑
l=1
l−1
∏
i=1
µ2
i
n−l
∏
j=l
λ j
2
n/2
∑
l=1
l−1
∏
i=1
µ2
i
n−l
∏
j=l
µ j
(6)
and
ξδ− ξδ+1
ξδ+1− ξδ+2
=⊓δ+1 = λδ+1
µδ+1
≈
n− δ− 1
k
∑
j=α
(n− δ− 1)k(δ + 1)k− j
n2k− j
δ + 1
k
∑
j=α
(δ + 1)k(n− δ− 1)k− j
n2k− j
(7)
wherefromnowonwereferto ⊓δ+1 asthedriftoftheprocess.
Proof. Our results are derived based on constructions from
Tan[58].Weconstructasub-matrixof Q,denoted B,asshown
in Figure 20. LetW′
1 = (µ1, 0, . . . ,0), W′
n−1 = (0, . . . ,0, λn−1).
Then, we can expressQas
Q =


0 . . . 0
W1 B W n−1
0 . . . 0


As a reminder, the stationary distribution can be found via
limt→∞ P(t) = eQt, where we have
eQt =
∞
∑
i=0
ti
i! Qi =
∞
∑
i=0
ti
i!


0 . . . 0
Bi−1W1 Bi Bi−1Wn−1
0 . . . 0


As Tan (eq. 2.3) shows, we have
ξ(t) = B−1
[
∞
∑
i=0
Bi− In−1
]
W1
Since we want the ultimate probabilities, we have that
ξ = lim
t→∞
ξ(t) =−B−1W1
We can explicitly computeξδ in terms of our ratesµi and λi,
getting
ξδ =
n−δ
∑
l=1
n−l
∏
i=1
µi
n−1
∏
j=n−l+1
λ j
n
∑
l=1
n−l
∏
i=1
µi
n−1
∏
j=n−l+1
λ j
However,wenotethat ui = λn−i.Algebraicmanipulationfrom
this observation leads to the two equations in the theorem.
This expression is strictly lower than the Chvatal bounds used
in Section 4.
Using the construction for the absorption (and
(ir)reversibility) probabilities as discussed previously, a nat-
ural follow up computation is in regards tomean conver-
gence time. LetTz(t) = inf{t≥ 0 : Xt ={0, n}|X0 = z}, and
let τz = E[Tz(t)]. τz isthemeantimetoreacheitherabsorbing
state, starting from statez, which corresponds to the mean
convergence time. The next theorem characterizes this distri-
bution.
Theorem 3. Let τz be the expected time to convergence,
startingfromstate z > n/2,toanyofthetwoconvergingstates
in the network (all-red or all-blue). Then,
τz =
n−1
∑
d=1
x(d)y(d)
2
n/2
∑
l=1
l−1
∏
i=1
µ2
i
n−l
∏
j=l
µ j
(8)
where x(d)and y(d)are
x(d) =
min(z,d)
∑
l=1
l−1
∏
i=1
µi
d−1
∏
j=l
λ j
y(d) =
n−d−max(z−d,0)
∑
l=1
n−l
∏
i=d+1
µi
n−1
∏
j=n−l+1
λ j
(9)
Proof. Following the calculations from before,−B−1 at row
zprovides the number of traversals to each other state starting
from z. Calculating their sum, we have our result. The above
equation is the full expression of the matrix row sum.
Theorem 3 leads to the next lemma that captures property
P2,undertheassumptionthatatthebeginningoftheprotocol,
one proposal has at leastαsupport in the network.
Lemma 4. Slush reaches an absorbing state in ﬁnite time
almost surely.
18
=== PAGE 19 ===
B =


−(λ1 + µ1) λ1 0 ··· ··· 0
µ2 −(λ2 + µ2) λ2 0 ··· 0
0 µ3 −(λ3 + µ3) λ3 ··· 0
... ... ... ... ... ...
... ... µn−3 −(λn−2 + µn−2) λn−3 0
... . . . 0 µn−1 −(λn−2 + µn−2) λn−2
0 . . . 0 0 µn−1 −(λn−1 + µn−1)


Figure 20: MatrixB.
Proof. Starting from any non-absorbing, transient state, there
isanon-zeroprobabilityofbeingabsorbed.Additionally,since
terminationisﬁniteandeverywherediﬀerentiable,Theorem3
alsoimpliesthattheprobabilityofterminationofanynetwork
conﬁguration where a proposal has≥ α support in bounded
time tmax is strictly positive.
A.3 Snowﬂake
In Snowﬂake, the sampled set of nodes includes Byzantine
nodes. We introduce the decision functionD(∗), which is
constructed by having each node also keep track of the total
number of consecutive times it has sampled a majority of the
same color (β). Finally, we introduce a function calledA(St ),
the adversarial strategy, that takes as parameters the entire
conﬁgurationofthenetworkattime t,aswellasthenextsetof
nodes chosen by the scheduler to execute, and as a side-eﬀect,
modiﬁes the set of nodesB to some arbitrary conﬁguration
of colors.
In order for our prior framework to apply to Snowﬂake, we
must deal with a key subtlety. Unlike in Slush, where it is
clear that once the network has reached one of the converging
statesandthereforemaynotrevertback,thisnolongerapplies
to Snowﬂake, since any adversaryf≥ αhas strictly positive
probabilityofrevertingthesystem,albeitthisprobabilitymay
beinﬁnitesimallysmall.TheCTMCisﬂexibleenoughtodeal
with a system where there is only one absorbing state, but
the long-term behavior of the system is no longer meaningful
since,afteraninﬁniteamountoftime,thesystemisguaranteed
torevert,violatingsafety.Wecouldtriviallyboundtheamount
of time, and show safety using this bounded time assumption
bysimplycharacterizingthedistributionof etQ,where Qisthe
generator. However, we can make the following observation:
if the probability of going from statec (all-blue) toc− 1 is
exponentially small, then it will take the attacker exponential
time (in expectation; note,this is a lowerbound,andin reality
it will take much longer) to succeed in reverting the system.
Hence,wecanassumethatonceallcorrectnodesarethesame
color, the attack from the adversary will terminate since it is
impractical to continue an attack. In fact, under reasonably
bounded timeframes, the variational distance between the
exact approach and the approximation is very small. We leave
details to the accompanying paper,but we brieﬂy discuss how
analysis proceeds for Snowﬂake.
AsstatedinSection4,thewaytoanalyzetheadversaryusing
the same construction as in Slush is to condition reversibility
on the ﬁrst nodeu deciding on blue, which can happen at
any state (as speciﬁed byD(∗)). At that point, the adversarial
strategy collapses to a single function, which is to continually
vote for red. The probabilities of reversibility, for all states
{1, . . . ,c− 1}mustencodetheprobabilitythatadditionalblue
nodes commit, and the single function of the adversary. The
birth and death rates are transformed as follows:
{
µi = i(1− I[D(∗, i, B)]) H (N , c− i + f , k, α)
λi = ( c− i)(1− I[D(∗, c− i, R)]) H (N , i, k, α)
From here on, the analysis is the same as in Slush. Under
various k and β, we can ﬁnd the minimalα that provides the
system strong irreversibility properties.
The next lemma captures P3, and the proof follows from
central limit theorem.
Lemma5. If f < O(√n),and α =⌊k/2⌋ + 1,thenSnowﬂake
terminates inO(log n)rounds with high probability.
Proof. Theresultsfollowsfromcentrallimittheorem,wherein
for α =⌊k/2⌋ + 1, the expected bias in the network after
sampling will beO(√n). An adversary smaller than this bias
will be unable to keep the network in a fully-bivalent state
for more than a constant number of rounds. The logarithmic
factor remains from the mixing time lower bound.
A.4 Snowball
Wemakethefollowingobservation:iftheconﬁdencesbetween
redandblueareequal,thentheadversaryhasthesameidentical
leverage in the irreversibility of the system as in Snowﬂake,
regardless of network conﬁguration. In fact, Snowﬂake can
be viewed as Snowball but where drifts in conﬁdences never
exceed one. The same analysis applies to Snowball as in
Snowﬂake, with the additional requirement of bounding the
long-term behavior of the conﬁdences in the network. To
that end, analysis follows using martingale concentration
inequalities, in particular the one introduced in Equation 5.
19
=== PAGE 20 ===
Snowball can be viewed as a two-urn system, where each
urn is a sub-martingale. The guarantees that can be extracted
hereon are that the conﬁdences of the majority committed
value (in our frame of reference is always blue), grow always
more than those of the minority value, with high probability,
drifting away ast→ tmax.
A.5 Safe Early Commitment
As we reasoned previously, each conﬂict set in Avalanche can
be viewed as an instance of Snowball, where each progeny
instance iteratively votes for the entire path of the ancestry.
This feature provides various beneﬁts; however, it also can
lead to some virtuous transactions that depend on a rogue
transaction to suﬀer the fate of the latter. In particular, rogue
transactionscaninterjectin-betweenvirtuoustransactionsand
reduce the ability of the virtuous transactions to ever reach
the requiredisAcceptedpredicate. As a thought experiment,
supposethatatransaction Ti namesasetofparenttransactions
that are all decided, as per local view. IfTi is sampled over
a large enough set of successful queries without discovering
any conﬂicts, then, since by assumption the entire ancestry of
Ti is decided, it must be the case (probabilistically) that we
have achieved irreversibility.
To then statistically measure the assuredness thatTi has
been accepted by a large percentage of correct nodes without
any conﬂicts, we make use of a one-way birth process, where
a birth occurs when a new correct node discovers the conﬂict
of Ti. Necessarily,deathscannotexistinthismodel,becausea
conﬂicting transaction cannot be unseen once a correct node
discovers it. Our births are as follows:
λi = c− i
c
(
1−
(n−i
k
)
(n
k
)
)
(10)
Solving for the expected time to reach the ﬁnal birth state
providesalowerboundtothe β1 parameterinthe isAccepted
fast-decisionbranch.Thetablebelowshowsanexampleofthe
analysisfor n = 2000, α = 0.8k,andvarious k,where ε≪ 10−9,
and whereβis the minimum required value before deciding.
Overall, a very small number of iterations are suﬃcient for
k 10 20 30 40
β 10.87625 10.50125 10.37625 10.25125
thesafeearlycommitmentpredicate. Thissupportsthechoice
of βin our evaluation.
A.6 Initialization Heuristic
Toimproveliveness,wecanusestrongsynchronyassumptions.
The heuristic works as follows. Every node operates in two
phases: in the ﬁrst phase, it gossips and collects proposals
for O(log n)rounds, where each round lasts for the maximum
messagedelay,whichensurestheproposalfromacorrectnode
will propagate to almost all other correct nodes; in the second
phase, each node stops collecting proposals, and gossips the
Sa
f
Sd
Sb
Sb
Sd
Sa
Figure 21: Changes in network view based onSd’s size. All
priorproofsuptonowrepresentthevariantwhere Sa = Sb = ∅.
With the new construction, the probability of safety violation
is simply a direct application of the prior sets of proofs under
the new subsets.
existing proposals for an additionalO(log n) rounds so that
every correct node ends up with approximately the same set
of proposals. Finally, each node samples for the proposals it
knows of locally, checking for those that have anαmajority,
ordereddeterministically,suchasbyhashvalues.Itthenselects
the ﬁrst value by the order as its initial state when it starts the
actual consensus protocol. In a cryptocurrency setting, the
deterministic ordering function would incorporate fees paid
out for every new proposal, which means that the adversary
is ﬁnancially limited in its ability to launch a fairness attack
against the initialization.
A.7 Churn and View Discrepancy
Realistic systems need to accommodate the departure and
arrival of nodes. Up to now, we simpliﬁed our analysis by
assuming a precise knowledge of network membership, i.e.
L(u) = N.Wenowdemonstratethatcorrectnodescanadmit
awell-characterizedamountofchurn,byshowinghowtopick
parameters such that Avalanche nodes can diﬀer in their view
of the network and still safely make decisions.
To characterize churn we use a generalized set intersec-
tion construction that allows us to make arguments about
worst-case network view splits. Before formalizing it, we
provide the intuition: suppose we split the network into two
entirely independent, but fully connected, subsets. Clearly,
the Byzantine adversary wins with probability one since it
can send two conﬂicting transactions to the two independent
networksrespectively,andtheywouldﬁnalizethetransactions
immediately. This represents the worst case view split. We
20
=== PAGE 21 ===
can generalize this to arbitrary network splits, which can even
be applied recursively in each subset. The proofs of safety
then are a matter of characterizing the probability of red and
blue committing into the two (possibly independent) subsets.
Suppose we divide the set of correct nodes into three
subsets, Sa, Sd, Sb. We overloadL(S∗)to represent the views
of any node within the input set. The view of all nodes in
Sa is L(Sa) = Sa∪ Sd∪ B, the view of all nodes inSb is
L(Sb) = Sb∪ Sd∪ B,andtheviewof Sd is N.Weassumethe
worst case, which means that adversarial nodes are common
to all subsets. WhenSd = ∅, this represents a division of the
network into two equal subsets where|Sa| =|Sb| = n/2 2. If
Sd is allcorrectnodes,then |Sa| =|Sb| = n. This construction
is visually demonstrated in Figure 21.
Lemma 6. Let τ∈ Z+. Let|Sd| = n− τ, and thus|S{a,b}| =
τ/2. Thereexists some maximalsize ofτsuchthatprobability
of any two nodesu, v∈ Sa, Sb, Sd ﬁnalizing equivocating
transactions is less thanε.
Proof. We assume that the adversary has full control of the
network view splits, meaning that they choose in full how to
create Sa, Sb, Sd. To prove safety, we simply reuse the same
exact construction as in Subsection A.3, but we replace the
original setN with a new set of interest, namelySa∪ Sd∪ B
(i.e., we excludeSb) 3. To thus ﬁnd the maximalτ, we simply
replace ui and λi with
{
¯µi = i H (Sa∪ Sd∪ B, c− (τ/2)− i, k, α), for i→ i− 1
λi = (c− i) H (Sa∪ Sd∪ B, i, k, α), for j→ i + 1
(11)
where
P(H (Sa∪ Sd∪ B, x, k)≥ α)
=
k
∑
j=α
(x
j
)(c− (τ/2)− x
k− j
)/(c− (τ/2)
k
) (12)
and apply the same construction as in Subsection A.3. As
τ increases, it is clear thatSa (and conversely,Sb), become
more independent and less reliant on the values proposed by
membersin Sd,thusincrementingtheabilityoftheadversaries.
2|Sa|and|Sb|do not have to be equal, we assume so as a demonstration.
3Sets are symmetric in this example.
21